Email is a Postcard:\
 
=====================

*by Blue-footed Booby*\

Email is a postcard: email is a word that barely existed 25 years ago.
But what is that word? It’s “e” for electronic, stuck together with
“mail,” which, way back when the term was invented, must have referred
to the little pieces of paper moved from place to place by postal
services. There were lots of different types of letters back then,
though. There were the letters in thick legal envelopes that you
couldn’t see through, good for concealing cash when donating to Riseup
or ordering fanzines. There were those flimsily enveloped letters that
you could hold up to the light to make out some of the words in a love
letter. 8.5 $\times$ 11 yellow ones full of unfolded papers, padded ones
that kept mix tapes from being crushed. What kind of letter should we
imagine when thinking of the anarchist postal worker delivering an email
through the internet?

Email is a postcard. Anyone involved in the transmission of your
precious email can read its contents. Maybe most people don’t choose to,
but you should know that they definitely could. Some places won’t.
Riseup won’t, but we’re not the only ones involved. If you were to send
detailed information about your affinity group’s plans for nonviolent
direct action to end war and you were to send it on a postcard that the
Department of Defense happened to help carry on its way, don’t you think
they might want to take a peek? For information on sending e-letters in
an envelope, see:\
<http://help.riseup.net/security/measures/>\

1

(1,2.1)

3

1

(0,2) ![image](house)
