:\
How the Internet makes organizing harder
========================================

*by Eric Lee, originally published in Industrial Worker*\

1

(0.11,1.2) ![image](google)

Back in 1974, I was a student in Cornell University’s labor relations
program working during the summer for a union in New York City. The
union’s education director (today its president) suggested to me that I
quit university and go to work in a factory where I could organize
workers. That was the way to get involved in the trade union movement,
he told me. I pondered the offer—it would have involved moving to
Indiana—and eventually decided not to do it.

Thanks to the Internet, that scenario is no longer possible.

I had been a political activist for a few years by then (I started quite
young) but there was really no way for a factory owner in Indiana to
know who I was. I probably could have covertly entered the factory and
helped unionize it.

Today, factory owners are a mouse-click from knowing everything about
each of us. The old strategy of blacklisting—employed so successfully
against unions for many years—has now become infinitely more effective
thanks to the net. According to a recent report, “Starbucks managers
discovered that two pro-union employees in New York were graduates of a
Cornell University labor program... Managers took the names of graduates
from an online Cornell discussion group and the school’s website and
cross-checked them with employee lists nationwide. They found that three
employees in California, Michigan and Illinois were graduates of the
program and recommended that local managers be informed.”

That’s pretty clever – Starbucks was not only looking for troublemakers,
but also for potential troublemakers, or people who might have sat in
class next to troublemakers. It was chilling for me to read that they
were specifically targeting Cornell labor program graduates. That
brought home to me the point that if this technology had existed in
1974, it would not have been possible to covertly insert someone like
myself into a non-union factory.

Using the techniques of data-mining, human resources staff will be able
to block the employment of not only trade union organizers, but of
people who might be friends with union organizers. If I were a
union-buster, the first thing I’d do is sign up with Facebook (where one
is actually faceless and anonymous) and “friend” all the union activists
I could. In the real world, this would be tricky, expensive and
time-consuming. But not online.

Many of us, myself included, have long argued that unions should make
the best possible use of the net, and that the net offers us new
possibilities for organizing, campaigning, and strengthening our unions.
The low cost and global reach of the net, we believed, would empower
unions and level the playing field in the struggle with employers.

But the net also offers new possibilities for union-busters and there is
some evidence that corporations are using the net more effectively than
we do.

How do we cope with the dangers of data-mining and net-based
blacklisting? We need our members and especially our organizers to learn
some of the basic skills for protecting their privacy online. We hear
all the time about how teenagers are being warned that what they write
today on MySpace and Facebook can come back to haunt them when they
apply for their first jobs, but where are the unions warning members how
to behave online, how to protect their identities, encrypt their
correspondence, visit websites anonymously? Which unions are creating
for themselves secure areas for online discussion that are not easily
data-mined by the opposition?

As the Starbucks example shows, some employers have thought this through
and are way ahead of us in the game. We in the trade union movement need
to begin training our officers, staff, members and potential members in
the art of survival in an age when privacy is increasingly becoming a
thing of the past.
