[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

1. Introduction
===============

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**1. Introduction**

**1.A. What this essay is about**

**1.B. Some acknowledgments**

\
 **1. Introduction**

**1.A. What this essay is about**

The following essay describes the emergence, or expansion, of a specific
type of relational dynamic, which I call peer to peer. It’s a form of
human network-based organisation which rests upon the free participation
of equipotent partners, engaged in the production of common resources,
without recourse to monetary compensation as key motivating factor, and
not organized according to hierarchical methods of command and control.
It creates a Commons, rather than a market or a state, and relies on
social relations to allocate resources rather than on pricing mechanisms
or managerial commands.

This format is emerging throughout the social field: as a format of
technology (the point to point internet, filesharing, grid computing,
the Writeable Web initiatives, blogs), as a third mode of production
which is also called Commons-based peer production (neither centrally
planned nor profit-driven), producing hardware, software (often called
Free Libre Open Sources Software or FLOSS) and intellectual and cultural
resources (wetware) that are of great value to humanity (Wikipedia), and
as a general mode of knowledge exchange and collective learning which is
massively practiced on the internet. It also emerges as new
organizational formats in politics, spirituality; as a new ‘culture of
work’. This essay thus traces the expansion of this format, seen as a
“isomorphism" (= having the same format), in as many fields as possible.
The common format in which the peer to peer dynamic emerges is the
format of the "distributed network", which, according to the defintion
of A. Galloway in his book Protocol, differs both from the centralized
network (all nodes have to pass through one single hub), and from the
decentralized network (all nodes have to pass through hubs). In a
distributed network the nodes, as autonomous agents, can connect through
any number of links. Hubs may exist, but are not obligatory.

The essay tries not only to describe, but attempts to provide an
explanatory framework of why it is emerging now, and how it fits in a
wider evolutionary framework (not in the sense of an inevitable natural
evolution, but as an intentional moral breakthrough).

The underlying logic of development in which the emergence of P2P is
best understood, may be by viewing 'participation' as the key variable,
seeing how it intensifies historically in various social formations.
This idea was best expressed by John Heron in a personal communication:

"There seem to be at least four degrees of cultural development, rooted
in degrees of moral insight and not in an evolutionary logic:

​(1) autocratic cultures which define rights in a limited and oppressive
way and there are no rights of political participation;

​(2) narrow democratic cultures which practise political participation
through representation, but have no or very limited participation of
people in decision-making in all other realms, such as research,
religion, education, industry etc.;

\
 (3) wider democratic cultures which practice both political
participation and varying degree of wider kinds of participation;

​(4) commons p2p cultures in a libertarian and abundance-oriented global
network with equipotential rights of participation of everyone in every
field of human endeavour."

Note that within most of the sections, the organisation is as follows:
the first subsection is descriptive, the second is explanatory, and the
third is historical. In the latter, I use the triune distinction
premodernity/modernity/postmodernity, well aware that it is a
simplification, and that it collapses many important distinctions, say
between the tribal and the agrarian era. But as an orienting
generalization that allows the contrasting of the changes occurring
after the emergence of modernity, it remains useful.Thus, the concept of
‘premodern’, means the societies based on tradition, before the advent
of industrial capitalism, with fixed social roles and a social
organisation inspired by what it believes to be a divine order; modern
means essentially the era of industrial capitalism; finally, the choice
of the term postmodern does not denote any specific preference in the
‘wars of interpretation’ between concepts such as postmodernity, liquid
modernity, reflexitive modernity, transmodernity etc.. It simple means
the contermporary period, more or less starting after 1968, which is
marked by the emergence of the informational mode of capitalism. I will
use the term cognitive capitalism most frequently in my characterization
of the current regime, as it corresponds to the interpretation, which is
the most convincing in my view. The French magazine Multitude is my main
source for such interpretations. It's essential meaning is the
replacement of an older 'regime of accumulation', centered on machines
and the division of labor corresponding to them; and one centered on
being part of a process of accumulation of knowledge and creativity, as
the new mainspring of power and profit. Finally, note that in the
accompagnying graphs of figures, I sometimes use the "early modern/late
modern/P2P era" framework. In this way, the current time frame can be
distinguished from a hypothetical coming situation where P2P is more
dominant than it is today, and what that would change in the
characteristics of such a society.

I will conclude my essay with the conclusion that P2P is nothing else
than a premise of a new type of civilization that is not exclusively
geared towards the profit motive. What I have to convince the user of is
that

- 1) a particular type of human relational dynamic is growing very fast
across the social fields, and that such combined occurrence is the
result of a deep shift in ways of feeling and being (ontology), of
knowing (epistemology), and of core value constellations (axiology)

\
 - 2) That it has a coherent logic that cannot be fully contained within
the present ‘regime’ of society.

\
 - 3) that it is not an utopia , but, as ‘an already existing social
practice’, the seed of a likely major transformation to come. I will not
be arguing that there is an 'inevitable evolutionary logic at work', but
rather that a new and intentional moral vision, holds the potential for
a major breakthrough in social evolution, leading to the possibility of
a new political, economic, and cultural 'formation' with a new coherent
logic.

Implicit in my interpretation of peer to peer as a social formation, is
that it is accompanied by a nascent socio-political movement, much as
industrial class relations triggered a labour movement. In the case of
the 'peer to peer movement' this movement concerns itself with the
promotion and defense of the Commons, i.e. the existence of a
common-property regime that exists alongside the state and the market,
but which is also under threat by a frenetic movement to privately
appropriate common resources.

Such a large overview will inevitably bring errors of interpretation
concerning detailed fields. I would appreciate if readers could bring
them to my attention. But apart from these errors, the essay should
stand or fall in the context of its most general interpretative point:
that there is indeed a isomorphic emergence of peer to peer throughout
the social field, that despite the differences in expression, it is the
same phenomena, and that it is not a marginal, but a 'fundamental'
development. It is on this score that my effort should be judged. If the
effort is indeed judged to be successful, I then would hope that this
essay inspires people from these different fields to connect, aware that
they are sharing a set of values, and that these values have potential
in creating a better, but not perfect or ideal, society.

How does the explanatory framework which I will provide for P2P, differ
from the use of the earlier metaphor of the network society, described
by Manuel Castells and many others, and lately in particular by the
network sociality concept proposed by Andreas Wittel? The best way to
differentiate the approaches is to see P2P as a subset of network
conceptions.

If you would have been a social scientist during the lifetime of Marx
and witnessed the emergence and growth of the factory-based industrial
model, and you would then have arrived at the equivalent of what social
network theory is today, i.e. an analysis of mainstream society and
sociality. This is what the network sociality model of Andreas Wittel
provides. But at the same time that the factory system was developing, a
reaction was created as well. Workers were creating cooperatives and
mutualities, unions and new political parties and movements, which would
go on to fundamentally alter the world. Today, this is what happens with
peer to peer. Whereas Castells and Wittel focus on the general emergence
of network society and society, and describes the networks overall and
the dominant features of it, I want and tend to focus on the birth of a
counter-movement, centered around a particular format of sociality based
in distributed networks, where the focus is on creating participation
for all, and not the buttressing of the 'meshworks of exploitation'. As
the dominant forces of society are mutating to networked forms of
organizing the political economy (called Empire by Toni Negri), a
bottom-up reaction against this new alienation is occurring (alienated,
because in Empire, the meshwork are at the service of creating ever more
inequality), by the forces of what Negri and Hardt call the
multitude(s). These forces are using peer to peer processes, and a peer
to peer ethos, to create new forms of social life, and this is what I
want to document in this essay.

**1.B. Some acknowledgments**

This essay is part of a larger project, the writing of a French-language
book, which I’m undertaking with Remi Sussan, a Paris-based free-lance
journalist working for ‘digital’ magazines like TechnikArt. Hence, the
continuing dialogue with him has been a great source of inspiration and
clarification in terms of the ideas expressed in this essay. We share an
enthousiasm for understanding P2P, though we frequently differ in our
interpretations. The current essay therefore reflects my own vision.

A first essay on P2P, essentially descriptive, but supported by many
citations, is available on the internet on the Noosphere.cc site, and
was written in 2003. However, most of these citations have now been
integrated as endnotes. In this current essay, which was written pretty
much in a ‘free flow of consciousness’ mode, though I will mention quite
a few names of social theorists, citations have been kept at a minimum,
but I may add them in later version as footnotes.

Some acknowledgements about the sources used: amongst the contemporary
and near-contemporary thinkers that I have been reading most recently in
preparing this essay are: Norbert Elias (Elias, 1975), Louis Dumont
(Vibert, 2004), and Cornelis Castoriadis (Castoriadis, 1975); the
Italian-French school of thought around Multitude magazine, especially
Toni Negri and Michael Hardt, Maurizio Lazzarato (Lazzarato, 2004),
Philippe Zafirian (Zafirian, 2003).Amongst the specific P2P pioneers I
have read, are Pekka Himanen (Himanen, 2002), for his study of work
culture; John Heron (Heron, 1998) and Jorge Ferrer (Ferrer, 2001), for
their work on participatory spirituality. Timothy Wilken of
[Synearth.org][] was instrumental in the discovery of the theories of
Edward Haskell and Arthur Coulter, on synergetics and cooperation, which
are explained on his website. Mackenzie Wark's Hacker Manifesto (Wark,
2004) and Alexander Galloway's Protocol (Galloway, 2004), have strongly
influenced my analysis of P2P power structures.

Retrieved from "[?title=1.\_Introduction&oldid=33129][]"

-   This page was last modified on 17 October 2009, at 16:51.
-   This page has been accessed 3,933 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /1._Introduction "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:1._Introduction&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /1._Introduction
  [View source]: ?title=1._Introduction&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=1._Introduction&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=1.+Introduction
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/1._Introduction
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/1._Introduction
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=1._Introduction&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=1._Introduction&oldid=33129
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [Synearth.org]: /SynEARTH_Network "SynEARTH Network"
  [?title=1.\_Introduction&oldid=33129]: ?title=1._Introduction&oldid=33129
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
