[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

2.1.B. The emergence of peer to peer as technological infrastructure
====================================================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**2.1.B. The emergence of peer to peer as technological infrastructure**

But how does all of the above it apply to technology?

In this and the next section, I will attempt to describe two related
aspects. One is that P2P-formatted technologies are now the very
infrastructure of business processes. Second, that the new technologies
of communication being created are in fact an alternative communication
infrastructure that in part transcends the state and corporate control
of traditional one-to-many mass media. It is also emerging as a
infrastructure of the free cooperation of autonomous agents.

This is not to say that the new infrastructure is not controlled 'at
all', that corporate forces are not at work in it, but means that we
cannot be blind to its radical potential, and radical 'actuality'
neither. Here as in the other sections we will see how P2P is at the
same time the very basis of the system, while also significantly
transcending it. While there is no direct cause to effect link between
peer to peer technology, as such, and the peer to peer relational
dynamic which is the topic of our research. Peer to peer technology is
more likely than centralized technology to be a technological basis for
enabling and supporting peer to peer human relationships. This
relationship is borne out by our description of the use of P2P
technologies to create an alternative peer-based communications
infrastructure (2.1.C), as well as for an infrastructure of human
cooperation (2.1.D.).

The Internet, as it was conceived by its founders (Abbate, 1999), and
evolved in its earliest format, was a point to point network, consisting
of equal networks, and the travel of data uses different sets of
resources as necessary. It is only later, after the rise of stronger and
weaker networks, of open, semi-closed and closed networks, that the
internet became hybrid, but it still in essence functions as a
distributed network, having no central core to manage the system. Its
hierarchical elements, such as the layered internet protocol stack
(though specifically designed to allow P2P processes), the domain name
system (a decentralized system of authorative servers which can
disconnect participants, you can't arrive at an address without DNS
intervention), or internet governance bodies , do not prohibit
many-to-many communication and participation, but enable it. The
evolution of the internet is largely seen to be 'organic' rather than
centrally directed, no single central player can direct it, though some
players are more influential than others.

The web similarly was seen as a many-to-many publishing medium, even
though it follows a semi-hierarchical client-server model (hence
decentralized rather than distributed). However, it is still and will
remain a essentially participative medium allowing anyone to publish his
own webpages. Because of its incomplete P2P nature, it is in the process
of becoming a true P2P publishing medium in the form of the Writeable
Web projects (also called the read/write web), that allow anyone to
publish from his own or any other computer,in the form of blogging etc…
Other P2P media are instant messaging, chat, IP telephony systems, etc..
For the internet and the web, P2P was not yet explicitly theorized
(though the idea of a network of networks was), they are weak P2P system
in that they only recognize ‘strong’ members, DNS-addressed computers in
the internet, servers in the case of the web. In the systems developed
afterwards, P2P was explicitly theorized: they are ‘strong’ P2P systems,
in which all members, also the weak members (without fixed DNS address
for the internet, blogs with permalinks in case of the web) can
participate.

Filesharing systems were the first to be explicitly tagged with the P2P
label, and this is probably the origin of the concept in the world of
technology. In such systems, all voluntary computers on the internet are
mobilized to share files amongst all participating systems, whether that
be documents, audiofiles, or audiovisual materials. In June 2003,
videostreaming became the internet application using the largest
bandwidth, and some time before, online music distribution had already
surpassed the physical distribution of CD’s (in the U.S.). Of course, in
the public mind filesharing is mostly associated with the sharing of
piracy of copyrighted music and video's . Though the earliest
incarnations of these P2P systems still used centralized databases, they
are now, largely thanks to the efforts of the music industry , mostly
true P2P systems, in particular Bittorrent and the planned development
of Exeem. Each generation of P2P filesharing has been more consistent in
its applications of peer to peer principles .

Finally, grid computing uses the P2P concept to create ‘participative
supercomputers’, where resources, spaces, computing cycles can be used
from any participant in the system, on the basis of need. It is
generally seen as the next paradigm for computing. Even programming now
uses the P2P concept of object-oriented programming, where each object
can be seen as a node in a distributed network.

All of the above clearly shows that the new format of our technological
infrastructure, which lies at the basis of basic and economic processes,
follow the P2P design. This infrastructure enables the interlinking of
business processes, beyond the borders of the individual factory and
company, and the interlinking of all the individuals involved. Soon, and
perhaps it is already the case today, it will be justified to claim that
without P2P-formatted technologies, it will be impossible to carry out
production and all the related economic mechanisms.

I could go on, but what should emerge in your mind, is not a picture of
a series of marginal developments, but the awareness that P2P networks
are the key format of the technological infrastructure that supports the
current economic, political and social systems. Companies have used
these technologies to integrate their processes with those of partners,
suppliers, consumers, and each other, using a combination of intranets,
extranets, and the public internet, and it has become the absolutely
essential tool for international communication and business, and to
enable the cooperative, internationally coordinated projects carried out
by teams. As we will see in our full review on the emergence of P2P
practices across the social field, an emphasis on business and economic
processes would be very one-sided. Politics, culture, and science are
equally changed by distributed practices enabled by the new
technological infrastructure. Examples are the grown of massive
multi-authorship in different scientific fields, with hundreds of people
involved in research projects, and the distributed use of scientific
instruments, such as arrays of small radio telescopes.

On the other hand, P2P systems are not just the outcome of plans of the
establishment, but are the result of the active intervention of
consumers avid for free access to culture, of knowledge workers actively
working to find technical solutions for their needed cooperative work,
and of activists consciously working for the creation of tools for an
emerging participative culture . P2P is both 'within' and 'beyond' the
current system.

Retrieved from
"[?title=2.1.B.\_The\_emergence\_of\_peer\_to\_peer\_as\_technological\_infrastructure&oldid=1122][]"

-   This page was last modified on 30 September 2005, at 03:25.
-   This page has been accessed 1,178 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /2.1.B._The_emergence_of_peer_to_peer_as_technological_infrastructure
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:2.1.B._The_emergence_of_peer_to_peer_as_technological_infrastructure&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /2.1.B._The_emergence_of_peer_to_peer_as_technological_infrastructure
  [View source]: ?title=2.1.B._The_emergence_of_peer_to_peer_as_technological_infrastructure&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=2.1.B._The_emergence_of_peer_to_peer_as_technological_infrastructure&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=2.1.B.+The+emergence+of+peer+to+peer+as+technological+infrastructure
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/2.1.B._The_emergence_of_peer_to_peer_as_technological_infrastructure
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/2.1.B._The_emergence_of_peer_to_peer_as_technological_infrastructure
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=2.1.B._The_emergence_of_peer_to_peer_as_technological_infrastructure&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=2.1.B._The_emergence_of_peer_to_peer_as_technological_infrastructure&oldid=1122
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=2.1.B.\_The\_emergence\_of\_peer\_to\_peer\_as\_technological\_infrastructure&oldid=1122]:
    ?title=2.1.B._The_emergence_of_peer_to_peer_as_technological_infrastructure&oldid=1122
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
