[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

2.1.C. The construction of an alternative media infrastructure
==============================================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**2.1.C. The construction of an alternative media infrastructure**

Distributed technological networks are the most important infrastructure
for cognitive capitalism. But as a communication infrastructure, the
dominant transnational corporations could for a long time rely on their
own private telecommunication networks. The internet has radically
democratized access to this kind of infrastructure, to everyone with
access to a computer. Similarly, for its cultural hegemony, the dominant
social system has relied on "one to many" broadcasting system, which
require a heavy capital outlay, and are controlled by monopolistic
corporate interests, in charge of 'manufactured consent', and in other
countries, by the state itself. The stranglehold of corporate media is
such, including its hold on our very psyche's (we 'think like
television' even when we've not been watching it for years). It has
become all but impossible for any social minority (except religious and
ethnic groups which can marshall vast resources themselves) to have its
voice heard. Media reform seems definitely beyond reach. However, though
the internet is also characterized by a certain commercial exploitation,
and by very strong commercial entities such as Yahoo, as a whole, and as
a distributed network, it is not owned nor controlled by commercial
entities, but by a network of various entities: commercial,
governmental, nongovernmental, etc... It contains the historical promise
of an 'alternative information and communication infrastructure', a many
to many, bottom-up resource that can be used by various social forces.
Mackenzie Wark, in his Hacker Manifesto, distinguishes the producers of
immaterial use value, from the owners of the vectors of information,
without whom no exchange value can be realized. The promise of the
internet is that we now have a vector of information production,
distribution and exchange, that functions at least partly outside of the
control of what he calls the 'vectoralist' class. The situation seems to
be the following, and we use the distinctions drawn up by Yochai Benkler
in his "The Political Economy of the Commons" essay. The physical layer,
networks, and communication lines, are widely distributed between
commercial, state, and academic interests, with no single player or set
of players dominating, and the computers themselves are widely in the
hands of the public and civil society. The logical layer, especially
TCP/IP, and increasingly the various aspects of the read/write Web, the
filesharing protocols are still systematically rigged for participation.
The content layer, is on the one hand subject to an increasingly harsh
intellectual property regime, but, commercial players are themselves
subject to the logic of the economy of attention and the Wisdom Game,
dictating policies of information sharing and giving, in order to get
the attention. Next to the commercial portals, which may or may not play
a nefarious role, the public is widely enabled to create its own
content, and has been doing so by the millions. While part of the
previously existing Information Commons or public domain is
disappearing, other parts are being continuously constructed through the
myriad combined efforts of civil society users.

This process is in full swing and is what we attempt to describe in this
section. Below, I reproduce an adapted version of a diagram from Hans
Magnus Enzensberger, which outlines the difference between 'repressive'
and 'emancipatory' media. Without any doubt, the emerging alternative
media infrastructure has an overwhelming number of characteristics of
being an 'emancipatory' medium: 1) it is based on distributed
programming (not just a few); 2) each receiver is a potential
transmitter (not just a few broadcasters); 3) it has mobilization
potential (it doesn't generate passivity); 4) it is characterized by
interaction and self-production; 5) it enables a political learning
process; it allows collective production by equipotent participants; 6)
the social control is effected through self-organisation. Just compare
this list to the characteristics of corporate television! Thus, the
historical importance of these developments seems overwhelmingly clear.
This does not mean that the alternative internet media infrastructure
automatically leads to emancipation, but that it can certainly enable
political processes in that direction.

Let us now summarise these developments in technical terms. In terms of
media, the broadband internet is rapidly mutating to enhance the
capacities to create distributed online publishing in the form of the
Writeable Web (also called read-write web) and blogging in particular;
the distribution of audio programming is possible through internet radio
and various audioblogging developments such podcasting (audio content,
music or video distribution through iPod or MP3 players), and other
types of 'time-shifted radio' such as mobcasting ('casting' to mobile
phones), and even Skypecasting (using the popular Voice over Internet
Telephony software Skype , but for broadcasting purposes, especially
Internet radio programs). Audiovisual distribution, which we can call
public webcasting as it incorporates both audio and video, is possible
through the emerging video blogging (vlogging ), but mostly through
broadband P2P filesharing systems such as Bittorrent and Exeem , now
already responsible for the majority of internet traffic . While Exeem
is still in development at the time of writing this paragraph (June
2005), Bittorrent is considered to be a major innovation making easy
broadband-based audiovisual distribution all but inevitable. A wide
variety of associated services is being developed by small companies or
cooperative groups to assist citizens in their own production of
audiovisual material . What these services such as Common Bits and the
Broadcast Machine do, is to transform Bittorrent technology into a
internet broadcasting platform that can be used by common users without
expert technical knowledge.

All these developments taking together mean that the creation of an
alternative information and communication infrastructure, outside of the
control and ownership of the state and corporate-based one-to-many
broadcasting systems, is well under way. These developments are not the
product of a conscious activist strategy as the one proposed by Mark
Pesce and practiced by players such as Indymedia, but it also to a large
degree the natural outgrowth of the empowerment of the users, who,
whenever they by a WiFi hub, or install Skype for personal usage, or any
other natural act of ameliorating their own connectivity, are building
this alternative infrastructure, from the edges onward, step by step,
and this is also why it seems quite unstoppable . In a sense, this is
another example of the 'production without a manufacturer' or 'the
supply-side supplying itself*, explained in 3.1.A (and notes).*

These technological developments form the basis for a new practice of
citizen-produced 'journalism' or 'reporting' by a 'self-informing
public' centered around the phenomemon of blogs, and augmented by the
other techniques we have been discussing . See the example of the Korean
OhMyNews , working with 35,000 citizen reporters and 40 staff members,
as an example of a new type of hybrid journalism. These developments are
a new vehicle for the production of 'public opinion', for the creation,
expression , distribution and sharing of knowledge. And it is both
supplementing and competing with the traditional mass media vehicles
that used to mold public opinion . It represents an important
opportunity to distribute views that fall outside the purview of
'manufactured consent'. Clay Shirky has called it a 'process of mass
amateurisation' , an analysis that is related to my own concept of
'de-institutionalisation', a key aspect of peer to peer process which I
discuss in 3.3.C.

All this outpouring of expression, news and commentary is interlinked in
a blogosphere, which has developed its own techniques to distill what is
important, from what is less important. Similar with the broadcast model
is that the blogosphere still has hubs and connectors drawing large
crowds, but different is that it creates the possibility of a "long
tail". This means that whereas in the broadcast world the distribution
curve bottoms out at the end, with no resources left for minority
interests, in P2P media, this bottoming out does not occur (the curve
flattens before reaching the bottom), because the possibility exists of
creating thousands upon thousands of micro-communities, organized by
affinity. David Weinberger, focusing on the role of the blog for the
individual, says it is 'an expression of 'the self in conversation' ,
that is available as a permanent record (through the innovation of
permalinks,which create a fixed and permanent URL for every entry,
unlike webpages which were always subject to change and disappearance).
A crucial innovation for the spread of blogs has been the development of
RSS feeds , i.e. Really Simple Syndication, which allows internet users
to 'subscribe' to any blog they like, and to manage the totality of
their feeds through their email, RSS reader software, or online sites
like Bloglines. Related to the emergence and growth of the blogosphere,
is the growth in self-publishing, no longer the domain of dejected
authors, but becoming a first choice for many who desire to reach a
public directly without the traditional publisher intermediaries .

Therefore, in physical terms, for the evolving telecommunications
infrastructure, the broadcast model is being replaced by the ‘meshwork
system’, which is already used by the Wireless Commons movement to
create a worldwide wireless communications network that aims to bypass
the Telco infrastructure . Several local governments aim to aid such a
process . For Yochai Benkler,the development of a "Open physical layer"
based on open wireless networks, the so-called Spectrum Commons, is a
key precondition for the existence of a "Core Common Infrastructure".

In such a system a wide array of local networks is created at very low
cost, while they are interlinked with ‘bridges’. The technical
breakthrough making this possible is the invention of Viral
Communicators , or meshworks of cooperating devices that do not need an
infrastructure or a backbone but themselves create the network through
their excess capacity. Communication on these networks follows a P2P
model, just like the internet. Mark Pesce has already developed a
realistic proposal to build an integrated alternative network within ten
years , based on similar premises, and with the additional concept of
developing a 'Open Source TV Tuner' which he predicts will completely
overturn traditional broadcasting. (The same technology could also be
used for phone calls, once hybrid WiFi phones are available .) He has
developed serious arguments about why 'netcasting' is not only
economically feasible, but superior to the broadcasting model . There
are also already commercial versions of ‘file-serving television’ models
such as the one pioneered by TiVo as well as the different plans
involving TV over Internet Protocol . "Radio Your Way" is a similar,
though less popular, application for radio and there is a similar broad
array of internet radio developments . Telephony using the Internet
Protocol , recently popularized by Skype, is similarly destined to
overcome the limitations of the hitherto centralized telephone system.
P2P is generally seen as the coming format of the telecommunication
infrastructure, even by the industry itself, and confirmed by my own
former experience as strategic planner in that industry. British Telecom
has declared that by 2008, the entirety of its network will have been
converted to TCP/IP protocols.

While mobile telephony is strongly centralized and controlled, it will
have to compete with wireless broadband networks, and users are busily
turning it into yet another participative medium, as described by Howard
Rheingold in Smart Mobs.

In the above phenomenology of P2P, notice that I have taken an extreme
literal definition of P2P, as many hybrid forms exist, but the important
and deciding factor is: does it enable the participation of equipotent
members? One of the key factors is: how inclusionary is the social
practice, or technology, or theory ,or any other manifestation of the
P2P ethos.

These developments almost certainly mean that a new format of
distribution and consumption is arising. At stake is the eventual
unsustainability of the current TV broadcast model, in which the TV
stations sell their audiences to advertisers, because they control the
audience and the distribution of the programs. In the new form of
distribution, in which users themselves take control of the choice and
timing of the programs, because of the easy replication throughout the
internet, both disintermediation and re-intermediation occur. The
"hyperdistribution" of audiovisual material, think about the millions
already downloading movies and TV programs, creates a direct link
between producers and consumers. However, the economy of attention
suggests process of re-intermediation. But as we have seen in the
blogosphere for printed content, this process can be undertaken by
clever algorhythms and protocols and reputation-based systems, coupled
with processes of viral diffusion of recommendations in affinity groups,
and do not necessarily mean commercial portals or intermediaries. In a
upcoming book, Mark Pesce has coined the concept of 'hyperpeople' to
describe the new generation of techno-savvy youngsters who are already
living this new reality, and as the technology becomes increasingly
easier to use, it will be spreading throughout the population. And of
course, it is not just a new form of consumption, there are also changes
at the producer side, with audiences becoming themselves the producers
of audiovisual material, as we can see in the growth of podcasting
programs. Two consequences flow from this. First, the generalization of
the phenomemom of the "Long Tail",whereby minority audiences are no
longer constrained by the 'lowest common-denominator' mass media and
mass marketing logic; and we can expect a flowering of creativity and
self-expression. Second, the possibility of new majorities of taste and
opinion forming, outside of the constraints of the mass production of
unified corporate taste. As we expect from the playing out of P2P
processes, we see both a strengthening of personal autonomy and a new
type of collectivity. For some time now, we have seen democracies bypass
majority opinions and the development of hypermanipulation. The hope is
that techno-social developments are creating the possibility of a new
balance of power, a 'second superpower' of global public opinion that is
more democratic in character.

To judge the progress or regress of these efforts, we should look at
developments in the physical layer of the internet: who owns and
controls it, at present a wide variety of players, with a key role for
the public and civil society who own the computers which are in fact the
intelligent core of the internet; the logical layer or protocols, which
pits closed systems against open systems in a continious conflict; and
the content layer, which pits the free creation of an Information
Commons against permanent attempts to strengthen restrictive
intellectual property rights. According to Yochai Benkler, what we need
is a Core Commons Infrastructure, which would consist of an

-   an open physical layer in the form of open wireless networks, a
    'spectrum commons'
-   an open logical layer, i.e. systematic preference for open protocols
    and open platforms
-   an open content layer, which means the roll back of too restrictive
    IP laws geared to defend business monopolies and stifle the
    development of a free culture

Let's conclude by assessing the current 'techno-social' state of
progress of such an alternative infrastructure:

-   Bittorrent , Exeem, and other software programs enable broadband
    peercasting
-   Viral diffusion exists to circulate information about programming

What needs to be built is:

-   a meshwork of netcasting transmitters, as proposed by Mark Pesce
-   user-friendly desktop software, to manage content (Pesce's Open
    Tuner proposal)
-   better social mechanisms to select quality into such an alternative
    framework

\
 *Figure – Repressive Media vs. Emancipatory Media: Not available in
this version, request manuscript by email*

\

Retrieved from
"[?title=2.1.C.\_The\_construction\_of\_an\_alternative\_media\_infrastructure&oldid=16456][]"

-   This page was last modified on 3 November 2007, at 11:50.
-   This page has been accessed 2,389 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /2.1.C._The_construction_of_an_alternative_media_infrastructure
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:2.1.C._The_construction_of_an_alternative_media_infrastructure&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /2.1.C._The_construction_of_an_alternative_media_infrastructure
  [View source]: ?title=2.1.C._The_construction_of_an_alternative_media_infrastructure&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=2.1.C._The_construction_of_an_alternative_media_infrastructure&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=2.1.C.+The+construction+of+an+alternative+media+infrastructure
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/2.1.C._The_construction_of_an_alternative_media_infrastructure
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/2.1.C._The_construction_of_an_alternative_media_infrastructure
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=2.1.C._The_construction_of_an_alternative_media_infrastructure&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=2.1.C._The_construction_of_an_alternative_media_infrastructure&oldid=16456
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=2.1.C.\_The\_construction\_of\_an\_alternative\_media\_infrastructure&oldid=16456]:
    ?title=2.1.C._The_construction_of_an_alternative_media_infrastructure&oldid=16456
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
