[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

2.3.B. P2P and Technological Determinism
========================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**2.3.B. P2P and Technological Determinism**

Starting our description with the emergence of P2P within the field of
technology could be misconstrued as saying that P2P is a result of
technology, in a ‘technology-deterministic fashion’.

The precise role of technology in human evolution is subject to debate.
A first group of positions sees technology as ‘neutral’. Humans want
more control over their environment, want to go beyond necessity,and in
that quest, built better and better tools. But how we use these tools is
up to us. Many inventors of technology and discoverers of scientific
truths have argued this way, saying for example that atomic energy can
be used for good (energy) or for bad (war), but that is entirely a
political decision.

A different set of positions argues that on the contrary, technological
development has a logic of its own, that as a system is goes beyond the
intention of any participating individual, and in fact becomes their
master. In such a reading, technological evolution is inevitable and has
unforeseen consequences. In the pessimistic vision, it’s in fact the
ultimate form of alienation. This is so because technology is an
expression of just a part of our humanity, instrumental reason, but when
embedded in the technological systems and its machines, it then forces
us to ressemble it, and we indeed follow the logic of machines loose
many parts of our full humanity. Think of the positions of Heidegger,
Baudrillard, and Virilio as exemplars of such a type of analysis.
Like-minded analysis would point out that though strict Taylorism has
disappeared from immaterial-based production ,the factory model has in
fact spread out throughout society now, forming a kind of ‘Social
Taylorism’. Efficiency and productivity thinking has taken over the
sphere of intimacy. There has been a dramatic destruction of social
knowledge and skill, of autonomous cultures, and this type of knowledge
has been ‘appropriated’ by the system of capital, and re-sold to us a
commodities. Think of paid-for online dating, as a symptom of the loss
of skill in dating, as one example.

Technological determinism can also have a optimistic reading. In this
view, for example represented by the progress ideology of the late 19th
century, and currently by the technological transhumanists, such as
Kurzweil (Kurzweil, 2000), technology represents an increasing mastery
and control over nature, a means of going beyond the limitations set to
us by nature, and, for this type of interpretation, that is an entirely
good thing.

The position I personally feel the closest to is the ‘critical
philosophy of technology’ developed by Andrew Feenberg (Feenberg, 1991,
1999). In his analysis, technological artifacts are a social
construction, reflecting the various social interests: those of capital,
those of the engineering community conceiving it, but also, those of the
critical voices within that community, and of the ‘consumers’ subverting
the original aims of technology for entirely unforeseen usages. Feenberg
comes very close to recognize the new form of power that we discuss in
section four: i.e. the protocollary power (Galloway, 2004) which
concerns the ‘code’. The very form of the code, whether it is for the
hardware or the software, reflects what usages can be made of
technology.

It is in this sense that I see a first important relation between the
emergence of P2P and its technological manifestations. The engineers who
conceived the point to point internet already had a wholly new set of
conceptions which they integrated in their design. It was in fact
explicitely designed to enable peer-based scientific collaboration.
Thus, the emergence of peer to peer as a phenomena spanning the whole
social field is not ‘caused’ by technology; it is rather the opposite,
the technology reflects a new way of being and feeling, which we will
discuss in section 6A in particular. This position is a version of that
put forward by Cornelis Castoriadis in his "L'Institution Imaginaire de
la Societe". Society is not just a physical arrangement, or a
rational-functional arrangement, but everything is experienced
symbolically and reflects a meaning that cannot be reduced to the real
or the rational. It is the product of a 'radical social imaginary'. And
this imaginary though rooted in the past (through the symbolic meaning
of institutions), is nevertheless a constitutive creation of mankind.
Technology is just such a creation, a dimension of instituted society,
that cannot be divorced from the other elements . In this context, peer
to peer is the product of a newly arising radical social imaginary.
Nevertheless, this does not mean that technology is not an important
factor.

Why is that? In a certain sense, peer to peer, understood as a form of
participation in the commons, i.e. as communal shareholding, which we
discuss in section 3.4.C, has ‘always existed’ as a particular
relational dynamic. It was especially strong in the more egalitarian
tribal era, with its very limited division of labor, before the advent
of property and class division. But it was always limited to small
bands. After the tribal era, as we enter the long era of class-based
civilization, forms of communal shareholding and egalitarian
participation have survived, but always subvervient, first to the
authority structures of feudalism and similar ‘land-based systems’, then
to the ‘market pricing’ system of capitalism. But the situation is now
different, because the development of P2P technology is an extraordinary
vector for its generalization as a social practice, beyond the
limitations of time and space, i.e. geographically bounded small bands.
What we now have for the first time is a densely interconnected network
of affinity-based P2P networks. Thus, the technological format that is
now becoming dominant, is an essential part of a new feedback loop,
which strengthens the emergence of P2P to a degree not seen since the
demise of tribal civilization. It is in this particular way that the
current forms of P2P are a historical novelty, and not simply a repeat
of the tolerated forms of egalitarian participation in essentially
hierarchical and authoritarian social orders.

\
 To repeat: it is not the technology that causes P2P. Rather, as
technology, it is itself an expression of a deep shift in the
epistemology and ontology occurring in our culture. But nevertheless,
this technology, once created, becomes an extraordinary amplifier of the
existing shift. It allows a originally minoritarian cultural shift to
eventually affect larger and larger numbers of people. Finally, that
shift in our culture, is itself a function of the emergence of a field
of abundance, the informational field, which is itself strongly related
to the technological base that has helped its creation.

To explain this argument, let us formulate this question of ‘why now?’,
in a slightly different manner. Technology philosophers such as Marshall
McLuhan (McLuhan, 1994) and others, have pointed out that technology is
an ‘extension of our bodies’, or more precisely of the faculties of our
bodies and minds. In a simplified way: tribal-era technologies, such as
spears and arrows, reflect the extremeties of our limbs, the nails and
fingers. Agricultural era technologies reflect the extension of our
muscular system and the limbs proper: arms and legs. Industrial era
technologies reflect our central body and its internal metabolic
functions: the transformation of raw materials into more refined
products that can be used by our body. Industrial economies are about
producing, distributing and consuming physical products. But the
information economy era is characterized by the externalization of our
nervous system (telephone and telegraph) and our minds (computers), with
a logic of first one-to-one communication technologies, then many to one
(mass media), and finally with the internet and computer networks: many
to many.

If we look at history in such a broad and large way, we can see P2P
principles operating in the small bands of the tribal era. But as soon
as society complexified itself through more and more elaborate division
of labor, such was the complexity of organisation society, that it
seemed to make more sense to create centralized institutions. According
to system theorists, ‘fixed arrangements dramatically reduce transaction
costs’. In a Darwinian sense, one could say that they could better
manage information scarcity, so that a lesser number of players could
rationalize the organisation of such complexity, through hierarchical
formal rules. After the revolution of print, followed by the invention
of electronic communication, and a dramatic lessening of information
scarcity, we see a further integration of a more differentiated world
system, and the emergence of a market, though within that market, it
still made more sense to have larger and larger monopolistic players.
With the advent of worldwide communication networks through, and before
the internet these were a monopoly of the large companies, we see the
occurrence of major changes in organizational logic: a flattening of
hierarchies. According to system theorists complex systems cannot
themselves control there increasing number of ever-more efficient
subunits, unless by granting them ever-more increasing functional
autonomy. The larger system controls whether a subunit has carried a
task, but no longer how it is carried out. Thus his law of ‘requisite
hierarchy’ which states that the need for hierarchy diminishes in so far
as the subunits increase their own capacity for control. And the 'law of
requisite variety' of Arvid Aulin , which states that where internal
controls or external regulation is absent, hierarchy is needed. Thus one
of the keys to understand current processes is that communication
technologies have enabled this kind of control and regulation to such a
degree, as shown in P2P processes, that centralized command and control
can in fact be overcome to a very great extent. Or more correctly, that
the subunits become primary, down to the level of individual
participants, who can now voluntarily defer to the subunit for minimal
control of ‘what is produced’ (and no longer ‘how it is produced’),
while the subunits to the same vis a vis the overall system. Within
corporations P2P processes can only partially thrive, because they have
to protect the profit motive, but outside the corporation, this limit
can be overcome, and those processes of ‘production going outside the
boundaries of the corporation’ are increasingly showing that the profit
imperative, and the private appropriation of the social-cooperative
processes, is becoming counter-productive. In a lot more simpler terms,
let us then conclude that the development of information-processing
capabilities has liberated cooperation from the constraints of time and
space. Thus, while accepting the argument that P2P processes have always
existed, but confined to small bands (or, it eventually emerged for very
short periods in revolutionary situations only to be defeated by their
then still more efficient authoritarian and centralized enemies), it is
indeed ‘only now’, that such massive emergence of P2P is possible. We
must thus inevitably conclude that technology \<IS\> a very important
factor in this generalized emergence.

Retrieved from
"[?title=2.3.B.\_P2P\_and\_Technological\_Determinism&oldid=1127][]"

-   This page was last modified on 4 October 2005, at 11:45.
-   This page has been accessed 1,449 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /2.3.B._P2P_and_Technological_Determinism
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:2.3.B._P2P_and_Technological_Determinism&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /2.3.B._P2P_and_Technological_Determinism
  [View source]: ?title=2.3.B._P2P_and_Technological_Determinism&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=2.3.B._P2P_and_Technological_Determinism&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=2.3.B.+P2P+and+Technological+Determinism
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/2.3.B._P2P_and_Technological_Determinism
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/2.3.B._P2P_and_Technological_Determinism
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=2.3.B._P2P_and_Technological_Determinism&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=2.3.B._P2P_and_Technological_Determinism&oldid=1127
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=2.3.B.\_P2P\_and\_Technological\_Determinism&oldid=1127]: ?title=2.3.B._P2P_and_Technological_Determinism&oldid=1127
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
