[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

2. P2P as the Technological Framework of Cognitive Capitalism
=============================================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**2. P2P as the Technological Framework of Cognitive Capitalism**

2.1.A. Defining P2P as the relational dynamic of distributed networks

[2.1.B. The emergence of peer to peer as technological infrastructure][]

[2.1.C. The construction of an alternative media infrastructure][]

[2.1.D. P2P as a global platform for autonomous cooperation][]

[2.2. Explaining the Emergence of P2P technology][]

[2.3.A. Placing P2P in the context of the evolution of technology][]

[2.3.B. P2P and Technological Determinism][]

\
 **2.1.A. Defining P2P as the relational dynamic of distributed
networks**

Alexander Galloway in his book Protocol makes an important and clear
distinction between centralized networks (with one central hub where
everything must pass and be authorized, as in the old telephone
switching systems), decentralized systems, with more than one center,
but these subcenters still being authorative (such as the airport system
in the U.S. centered around hubs where planes must pass through), from
distributed systems, where hubs may exist, but are not obligatory (such
as the internet). In distributed networks, participants may freely link
with each other, they are fully autonomous agents. Hence the importance
to clearly distinguish between our usage of the concepts 'decentralized'
vs. 'distributed'. Peer to peer is specifically the relational dynamic
that arises in distributed networks.

So: what is peer to peer? Here’s a first tentative definition: It is a
specific form of relational dynamic, is based on the assumed equipotency
of its participants , organized through the free cooperation of equals
in view of the performance of a common task, for the creation of a
common good, with forms of decision-making and autonomy that are widely
distributed throughout the network.

P2P processes are not structureless, but are characterized by dynamic
and changing structures which adapt themselves to phase changes. It
rules are not derived from an external authority, as in hierarchical
systems, but generated from within. . It does not deny ‘authority’, but
only fixed forced hierarchy, and therefore accepts authority based on
expertise, initiation of the project, etc… P2P may be the first true
meritocracy. The treshold for participation is kept as low as possible.
Equipotency means that there is no prior formal filtering for
participation, but rather that it is the immediate practice of
cooperation which determines the expertise and level of participation.
Communication is not top-down and based on strictly defined reporting
rules, but feedback is systemic, integrated in the protocol of the
cooperative system. Techniques of 'participation capture' and other
social accounting make automatic cooperation the default scheme of the
project. Personal identity becomes partly generated by the contribution
to the common project.

P2P is a network, not a hierarchy (though it may have elements of it);
it is 'distributed', though it may have elements of centralization and
'decentralisation'; intelligence is not located at any center, but
everywhere within the system. Assumed equipotency means that P2P systems
start from the premise that ‘it doesn’t know where the needed resource
will be located’, it assumes that ‘everybody’ can cooperate, and does
not use formal rules in advance to determine its participating members.
Equipotency, i.e. the capacity to cooperate, is verified in the process
of cooperation itself. Validation of knowledge, acceptance of processes,
are determined by the collective. Cooperation must be free, not forced,
and not based on neutrality (i.e. the buying of cooperation in a
monetary system). It exists to produce something. It enables the widest
possible participation. These are a number of characteristics that we
can use to describe P2P systems ‘in general’, and in particular as it
emerges in the human lifeworld. Whereas participants in hierarchical
systems are subject to the panoptism of the select few who control the
vast majority, in P2P systems, participants have access to holoptism,
the ability for any participant to see the whole. Further on we will
examine more in depth characteristics such as de-formalisation,
de-institutionalisation, de-commodification, which are also at the heart
of P2P processes.

Whereas hierarchical systems are based on creating homogeinity amongst
its 'dependent' members, distributed networks using the P2P dynamic
regulate the 'interdependent' participants preserving heterogeinity. It
is the 'object of cooperation' itself which creates the temporary unity.
Culturally, P2P is about unity-in-diversity, it is concrete
'post-Enlightenment' universalism predicated on common projects; while
hierarchy is predicated on creating sameness through identification and
exclusion, and is associated with the abstract universalism of the
Enlightenment.

To have a good understanding of P2P, I suggest the following mental
exercise, think about these characteristics, then about their opposites.
So doing, the radical innovative nature of P2P springs to mind. Though
P2P is related to earlier social modes, those were most in evidence in
the early tribal era, and it now emerges in an entirely new context,
enabled by technologies that go beyond the barriers of time and space.
After the dominance during the last several millennia, of centralized
and hierarchical modes of social organisation, it is thus in many ways
now a radically innovative emergence, and also reflects a very deep
change in the epistemological and ontological paradigms that determine
behaviour and worldviews.

An important clarification is that when we say that peer to peer systems
have no hierarchy or are not centralized, we do not necessarily mean the
complete absence of such characteristics. But in a P2P system, the use
of hierarchy and centralization, serve the goal of participation and
many-to-many communication, and are not used to prohibit or dominate it.
This means that though P2P arises in distributed networks, not all
distributed networks exhibit P2P processes. Many distributed bottom-up
processes, such as the swarming behaviour of insects, of the behaviour
of buyers and sellers in market, are not true P2P processes, to the
degree that they lack holoptism, and do not promote participation. P2P,
as a uniquely human phenomenom integrates moral and intentional aspects.
When distributed meshworks, for example interlinking boards of directors
, serve a hierarchy of wealth and power, and are based on exclusion
rather than participation, this does not quality as a full P2P process.

P2P can be a partial element of another process; or it can be a full
process. For examples, the technological and collaborative
infrastructure build around P2P principles, may enable non-P2P
processes. In the example just above it is the infrastructure of Empire,
but it can also enables new types of marketplaces , gift/sharing economy
practices. Where P2P is a full process, we will argue that it is a form
of communal shareholding producing a new type of Commons.

Retrieved from
"[?title=2.\_P2P\_as\_the\_Technological\_Framework\_of\_Cognitive\_Capitalism&oldid=1121][]"

-   This page was last modified on 4 October 2005, at 11:44.
-   This page has been accessed 3,807 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /2._P2P_as_the_Technological_Framework_of_Cognitive_Capitalism
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:2._P2P_as_the_Technological_Framework_of_Cognitive_Capitalism&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /2._P2P_as_the_Technological_Framework_of_Cognitive_Capitalism
  [View source]: ?title=2._P2P_as_the_Technological_Framework_of_Cognitive_Capitalism&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=2._P2P_as_the_Technological_Framework_of_Cognitive_Capitalism&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=2.+P2P+as+the+Technological+Framework+of+Cognitive+Capitalism
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/2._P2P_as_the_Technological_Framework_of_Cognitive_Capitalism
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/2._P2P_as_the_Technological_Framework_of_Cognitive_Capitalism
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=2._P2P_as_the_Technological_Framework_of_Cognitive_Capitalism&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=2._P2P_as_the_Technological_Framework_of_Cognitive_Capitalism&oldid=1121
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [2.1.B. The emergence of peer to peer as technological
  infrastructure]: /2.1.B._The_emergence_of_peer_to_peer_as_technological_infrastructure
    "2.1.B. The emergence of peer to peer as technological infrastructure"
  [2.1.C. The construction of an alternative media infrastructure]: /2.1.C._The_construction_of_an_alternative_media_infrastructure
    "2.1.C. The construction of an alternative media infrastructure"
  [2.1.D. P2P as a global platform for autonomous cooperation]: /2.1.D._P2P_as_a_global_platform_for_autonomous_cooperation
    "2.1.D. P2P as a global platform for autonomous cooperation"
  [2.2. Explaining the Emergence of P2P technology]: /2.2._Explaining_the_Emergence_of_P2P_technology
    "2.2. Explaining the Emergence of P2P technology"
  [2.3.A. Placing P2P in the context of the evolution of technology]: /2.3.A._Placing_P2P_in_the_context_of_the_evolution_of_technology
    "2.3.A. Placing P2P in the context of the evolution of technology"
  [2.3.B. P2P and Technological Determinism]: /2.3.B._P2P_and_Technological_Determinism
    "2.3.B. P2P and Technological Determinism"
  [?title=2.\_P2P\_as\_the\_Technological\_Framework\_of\_Cognitive\_Capitalism&oldid=1121]:
    ?title=2._P2P_as_the_Technological_Framework_of_Cognitive_Capitalism&oldid=1121
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
