[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

3.1.B. The Communism of Capital, or, the cooperative nature of cognitive capitalism
===================================================================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**3.1.B. The Communism of Capital, or, the cooperative nature of
[Cognitive Capitalism][]**

In modernity, the economic ideology sees autonomous individuals entering
into contracts with each other, selling labor in exchange for wages,
exchanging commodities for fair value, in a free market where the
‘invisible hand’ makes sure that the private selfish economic aims of
such individuals, finally contribute to the common good. The ‘self’ or
subject of economic action is the company, led by entrepreneurs, who are
the locus of innovation. Thus we have the familiar subject/object split
operating in the economic sphere, with an autonomous subject using and
manipulating resources.

This view is hardly defensible today. The autonomous enterprise has
entered a widely participative field that blurs clear distinctions and
identities. Innovation has become a very diffuse process . It is linked
with its consumers through the internet, today facing less a militant
labor movement than a ‘political consumer’ who can withhold his/her
buying power with an internet and blogosphere able to damage corporate
images and branding in the very short term through viral explosions of
critique and discontent. It is linked through extranets with partners
and suppliers. Processes are no longer internally integrated, as in the
business process re-engineering of the eighties, but externally
integrated in vast webs of inter-company cooperation. Intranets enable
widespread horizontal cooperation not only for the workers within the
company, but also without. Thus, the employee, is in constant contact
with the outside, part of numerous innovation and exchange networks,
constantly learning in formal but mostly informal ways. Because of the
high degree of education and the changing nature of work which has
become a series of short-term contracts, a typical worker has not in any
real sense gained his essential skills and experience within the company
that he is working for at any particular moment, but expands on his
skill and experience throughout his working life. Innovation today is
essentially 'socialized' and takes place 'before' production, or 'after'
production, with reproduction being at marginal cost concerning
immaterial goods, and even if costly in the material sphere, being just
an execution of the design phase .

Moreover, because the complexity, time-based, innovation-dependent
nature of contemporary work, for all practical terms, work is organized
as a series of teams, using mostly P2P work processes. In fact, as
documented very convincingly by [Eric von Hippel][], in his book "The
Democratization of Innovation" (Von Hippel, 2004), innovation by users
(and particularly by what he calls 'lead users' ) is becoming the most
important driver of innovation, more so than internal market research
and R & D divisions. It is subverting one of the mainstays of the
division of labor. Commentators have noted that the whole dichotomy
between professionals and amateurs are in fact dissolving, giving rise
to the phenomena of 'citizen engineers' . Users, better than the
scientists, know what they need and now have the skills to develop
solutions for themselves, using other users for peer support . These
user innovation communities are very important in the world of extreme
sports such as windsurfing for example , in technology and online music
, and in an increasing number of other areas. Recently, in May 2005,
Trendwatching.com, a business-oriented innovation newsletter using
thousands of spotters worldwide, has devoted a whole issue to the topic
of 'Customer-made innovation', highlighting several dozen examples in
all sectors of the economy. These trends will be greatly strengthened
with the further development of 'personal fabricator' technology. But
even before this, the process of creating an infrastructure for this
type of do-it-yourself economy is proceeding apace .

The smarter companies are therefore consciously breaking down the
barriers between production and consumption, producers and consumers, by
involving consumers, sometimes in a explicit open-source inspired
manner, into value creation . Think of how the success of eBay and
Amazon are linked to their successful mobilization of their user
communities: they are in fact integrating many aspects of commons-based
peer production. There are of course important factors, inherent in the
functioning of capitalism and the format of the enterprise, which cause
structural tensions around this participative nature, and the use of P2P
models, which we will cover in our explanatory section . The same type
of user-driven innovation has also been noted in advertising .
Accordingly, new business management theories are needed, which [Thomas
Malone][] calls "Coordination Theory", and it involves studying (and
organizing accordingly) the dependencies and relationships within and
without the enterprise . Not surprisingly this research into
'organizational physics' is also done through open source methods .
Apart from 'vanguard corporations' (see my thesis on netarchical
capitalism) that incorporate peer production as an essential component
of their activities, there is a broad shift towards a new attitude
towards consumers, with many associated phenomena. Management theorists
with a feeling for these trends argue that a radical shift is occurring,
and needs to occur, in the managerial class, in order to be able to
capitalize on these developments. David Rotman of the Rotman School of
Management argues that they have to become businesspeople will have to
become "more 'masters of heuristics' than 'managers of algorithms'" .
Books describing this shift are [Daniel Pink][]'s A Whole New Mind:
Moving from the Information Age to the Conceptual Age, and C.K.
Prahalad's The Future of Competition: Co-Creating Unique Value with
Customers.

So the general conclusion of all the above has to be the essentially
cooperative nature of production, the fact that companies are drawing on
this vast reservoir of a 'commons of general intellectuality', without
which they could not function. That innovation is diffused throughout
the social body. That, if we accept John Locke's argument that work that
adds value should be rewarded, then it makes sense to reward the
cooperative body of humankind, and not just individuals and
entrepreneurs. All this leads quite a few social commentators, from both
left and liberal (free enterprise advocates), to bring the issue of the
universal wage on the agenda and to retrieve the early Marxian notion of
the 'General Intellect' .

Why do we speak of ‘cognitive capitalism’? For a number of important
reasons: the relative number of workers involved in material production
is dwindling rather rapidly, with a majority of workers in the West
involved in either symbolic (knowledge workers) or affective processing
(service sector) and creation (entertainment industry). The value of any
product is mostly determined, not by the value of the material
resources, but by its level of integration of intelligence, and of other
immaterial factors (design, creativity, experiential intensity, access
to lifeworlds and identities created by brands). The immaterial nature
of contemporary production is reconfiguring the material production of
agricultural produce and industrial goods. In terms of professional
‘experience’, more and more workers are not directly manipulating
matter, but the process is mediated through computers that manage
machine-based processes.

But the most important argument as to the existence of a third phase of
Cognitive capitalism is therefore a hypothesis that the current phase of
capitalism is distinct in its operations and logic from earlier forms
such as merchant and industrial capitalism . It is based on the
accumulation of essentially knowledge assets. Instead of the cycle
conception-production-distribution-consumption, we have a new cycle
conception – reproduction of the informational core – production –
distribution. The key is now to possess an informational advantage, in
the form of intellectual property, and that can be embedded in
immaterial (software, content) or material (seeds, pharmaceuticals,
biotechnology) products. The production itself can be outsourced and is
no longer central to competitive advantage. And because the advantage is
in the information, it is protected through monopolies, enforced by the
state. This in turn leads to increasing and protected profits, with
prices no longer bearing any necessary relation to the production cost.
This fact is true for seeds, pharmaceuticals, software, content
products, biotechnology, etc… These inflated profits in turn have put an
enormous pressure on the totality of the economy.

According to the hypothesis of cognitive capitalism, there are three
main approaches in analyses of the current political economy:

1.  ‘neo-classical economics’ seeks for the laws of capitalism ‘as
    such’, and is today much involved in creating models and
    mathematizing them; according to CC theorists, it lacks a historical
    model to take into account the changes.
2.  Information economy models claim that information/knowledge has
    become a independent third factor of production, changing the very
    nature of our economy, making it ‘post-capitalist’
3.  In between is the hypothesis of cognitive capitalism, which, though
    it recognizes that we have entered a new phase, a third ‘cognitive’
    phase, it is still within the framework of the capitalist system.

What CC-researchers are building on is an earlier and still very
powerful school of economic theory, known as [the Regulation School][]
and especially strong in France (M. Aglietta), which considers that,
despite differences in national models, there are commonalities in the
structural evolution of the capitalist system, that it has been
characterized by different ‘regimes’ which each had their particular
modes of ‘regulation’ (forms of balancing the inherent instability of
the system). It was they, who focused most on the theories of
post-Fordism, arguing that after 1973, the Taylorist-Fordist system of
organizing work and the economy (with as its corollary Keynesianism) had
been replaced by new systems of organizing work and regulating the
economy.

[McKenzie Wark][]’s [Hacker Manifesto][] (Wark, 2004) goes one step
further in this analysis and argues that not only is the key factor of
the new era ‘information as property’, but with it comes the creation of
a new ruling class and a new class configuration altogether. While the
capitalist class owned factories and machinery, once capital was
abstracted in the form of stocks and information, a new class has arisen
which controls the ‘vectors of information’, the means of producing,
storing and distributing information, the means to transform use value
in exchange value. This is the new social force he calls the
‘vectoralist’ class. The class who actually produces the value (as
distinct from the class that can ‘realise’ it and thus captures the
surplus value), he calls the hacker class. It is distinguished from the
former because it actually creates new means of production: hardware,
software, new knowledge (wetware). See 3.3.D. for a fuller explanation
of the different interpretations of the current political economy, of
which P2P is a crucial element.

However, we believe that though the cognitive capitalism and vectoralist
class arguments are key to understand the current era, it is not
sufficient, and we will put forward our own hypothesis that will help in
understand the emerging future: the emergence of a netarchical class,
which is not dependent on either knowledge assets or information
vectors, but enables and exploits the networks of participatory culture.
See section 3.4.E. for a full explanation of this idea.

Retrieved from
"[?title=3.1.B.\_The\_Communism\_of\_Capital,\_or,\_the\_cooperative\_nature\_of\_cognitive\_capitalism&oldid=53219][]"

[Category][]:

-   [P2P Theory][]

-   This page was last modified on 27 August 2011, at 19:54.
-   This page has been accessed 2,829 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /3.1.B._The_Communism_of_Capital,_or,_the_cooperative_nature_of_cognitive_capitalism
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: /Talk:3.1.B._The_Communism_of_Capital,_or,_the_cooperative_nature_of_cognitive_capitalism
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /3.1.B._The_Communism_of_Capital,_or,_the_cooperative_nature_of_cognitive_capitalism
  [View source]: ?title=3.1.B._The_Communism_of_Capital,_or,_the_cooperative_nature_of_cognitive_capitalism&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=3.1.B._The_Communism_of_Capital,_or,_the_cooperative_nature_of_cognitive_capitalism&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=3.1.B.+The+Communism+of+Capital%2C+or%2C+the+cooperative+nature+of+cognitive+capitalism
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/3.1.B._The_Communism_of_Capital,_or,_the_cooperative_nature_of_cognitive_capitalism
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/3.1.B._The_Communism_of_Capital,_or,_the_cooperative_nature_of_cognitive_capitalism
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=3.1.B._The_Communism_of_Capital,_or,_the_cooperative_nature_of_cognitive_capitalism&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=3.1.B._The_Communism_of_Capital,_or,_the_cooperative_nature_of_cognitive_capitalism&oldid=53219
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [Cognitive Capitalism]: /Cognitive_Capitalism "Cognitive Capitalism"
  [Eric von Hippel]: /Eric_von_Hippel "Eric von Hippel"
  [Thomas Malone]: /Thomas_Malone "Thomas Malone"
  [Daniel Pink]: /Daniel_Pink "Daniel Pink"
  [the Regulation School]: ?title=The_Regulation_School&action=edit&redlink=1
    "The Regulation School (page does not exist)"
  [McKenzie Wark]: ?title=McKenzie_Wark&action=edit&redlink=1
    "McKenzie Wark (page does not exist)"
  [Hacker Manifesto]: /Hacker_Manifesto "Hacker Manifesto"
  [?title=3.1.B.\_The\_Communism\_of\_Capital,\_or,\_the\_cooperative\_nature\_of\_cognitive\_capitalism&oldid=53219]:
    ?title=3.1.B._The_Communism_of_Capital,_or,_the_cooperative_nature_of_cognitive_capitalism&oldid=53219
  [Category]: /Special:Categories "Special:Categories"
  [P2P Theory]: /Category:P2P_Theory "Category:P2P Theory"
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
