[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

3.1.C. The Hacker Ethic or ‘work as play’
=========================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**3.1.C. The Hacker Ethic or ‘work as play’**

In section 3.2 we will attempt to show the contradictory nature of the
relationship between capitalism and peer to peer processes. It needs P2P
to thrive, but is at the same threatened by it. A similar contradiction
takes place in the sphere of work. We said before how in the industrial,
‘Fordist’ model, the worker was considered an extension of the machine.
Another way of saying this, is that intelligence was located in the
process, but that the worker himself was deskilled, he was required to
be a ‘dumb body’, following instructions. The worker had to sell his
labor in order to survive, and meaning could only be found in the
activity of working itself, as a means of survival for the family, as a
way of social integration, as a means of obtaining identity through
one’s social role. But finding meaning in the content of the work itself
was exceptional. In post-Fordism important changes and reversals occur .
Today, the worker is supposed to communicate and cooperate, to have a
capacity to solve problems. He is required not only to use his
intelligence, but also has to engage his full subjectivity. Certainly
this increases the possibility to find fulfillment and meaning through
work, but that would be to paint a too rosy picture. Inside the company,
the quest for fulfillment is often contradicted by the empty purpose of
the company itself, especially as efficiency thinking, short termism and
a sole focus on profit, are taking hold as the main priorities . Peer to
peer processes characteristic of the project teams are in tension with
the hierarchical, feudal-like nature of the management by objectives
models , whose 'information scarcity'-based model is becoming
counterproductive even on capital's own terms . Psychological pressure
and stress levels are very high, since the worker has now full
responsibility and very high targets. One could say that instead of
exploiting the body of the worker, as was the case in industrial
capitalism, it is now the psyche being exploited, and stress-related
diseases have replaced industrial accidents. But this is not all: the
productivity model and modes of efficiency thinking have left the
factory to diffuse throughout society. It is not uncommon to manage
one’s family and children and household according to that model.
Dual-career parents come home tired and stressed to children that have
spent their day time in institutions since their very early age and have
little occasion to spend 'quality time' together; and are managed (or
manage themselves) like 'human resources' in a very competitive
environment. An increasing number of human relations (such as dating)
and creative activities have been commoditized and monetized. As the
pressure within the corporate time sphere intensifies through the hyper
competition based model of neoliberalism, learning and other necessary
activities to remain creative and efficient at work have been exported
to private time. Thus paradoxically, the Protestant work ethic has been
exacerbated, or as Pekka Himanen (Himanen,2001) would have it in his
Hacker Ethic , there has been a ‘Friday-isation of Sunday’ going on. In
other words, the values and practices of the productive sphere, the
sphere of the workweek including Friday, defined by efficiency, have
taken over the private sphere, the sphere of the weekend, Sunday, which
was supposed to be outside of that logic. But even within the corporate
sphere itself, these developments have lead to a widespread
dissatisfaction of the workforce. Interesting work is being done in
investigating the new forms of network sociality, as for example by
Andreas Wittel, but he also writes that this form of sociality, which he
contrasts with community , is geared to the creation and protection of
proprietary information. This is in sharp contrast with the Peer to Peer
sociality, and thus, focuses on the exacerbation of the Protestant work
ethic, and its cultural effects, rather than on the reaction against it.
Similarly, Pekka Himanen will not distinguish between the entrepreneurs
and the knowledge workers.

And this is precisely the important hypothesis of a Peer to Peer
sociality: new subjectivities and intersubjectivities (which we will
discuss later), are creating a counter-movement in the form of a new
work ethic: the hacker ethic (see also Kane, 2003). As mass
intellectuality increases through formal and informal education, and due
to the very requirements of the new types of immaterial work, meaning is
no longer sought in the sphere of salaried work, but in life generally,
and not through entertainment alone, but through creative expression,
through ‘work’, but outside of the monetary sphere. Occasionally, and it
was especially the case during the new economy boom, companies try to
integrate such methods, the so-called ‘Bohemian’ model. This explains to
a large part the rise of the Open Sources production method. In the
interstices of the system, between jobs, on the job when there is free
time, in academic circles, or supported by social welfare, new use value
is being created. Or more recently, by rival IT companies who are
understanding the efficiency of the model and seeing it as a way to
break the monopoly of Microsoft software. But it is done through a
totally new work ethic, which is opposed to the exacerbation of the
Protestant work ethic. And as it was first pioneered by the community of
‘passionate programmers, the so-called hackers, it is called ‘the hacker
ethic’. Himanen (Himanen, 2004) explains a few of its characteristics :

\
 - "*time is not rigidly separated into work and non-work; intensive
work periods are followed by extensive leave taking, the latter
necessary for intellectual and creative renewal; there is a logic of
self-unfolding at work, workers look for projects at which they feel
energized and that expands their learning and experience in desired
directions; participation is voluntary; learning is informal and
continuous; the value of pleasure and play are crucial; the project has
to have social value and be of use to a wider community; there is total
transparency, no secrets; there is an ethic that values activity and
caring; creativity, the continuous surpassing of oneself in solving
problems and creating new use value, is paramount*"

\
 In open source projects, these characteristics are fully present; in a
for-profit environment they may be partly present but enter into
conflict with the different logic of a for-profit enterprise.

Retrieved from
"[?title=3.1.C.\_The\_Hacker\_Ethic\_or\_%E2%80%98work\_as\_play%E2%80%99&oldid=1130][]"

-   This page was last modified on 5 October 2005, at 03:10.
-   This page has been accessed 1,355 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /3.1.C._The_Hacker_Ethic_or_%E2%80%98work_as_play%E2%80%99
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:3.1.C._The_Hacker_Ethic_or_%E2%80%98work_as_play%E2%80%99&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /3.1.C._The_Hacker_Ethic_or_%E2%80%98work_as_play%E2%80%99
  [View source]: ?title=3.1.C._The_Hacker_Ethic_or_%E2%80%98work_as_play%E2%80%99&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=3.1.C._The_Hacker_Ethic_or_%E2%80%98work_as_play%E2%80%99&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=3.1.C.+The+Hacker+Ethic+or+%E2%80%98work+as+play%E2%80%99
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/3.1.C._The_Hacker_Ethic_or_%E2%80%98work_as_play%E2%80%99
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/3.1.C._The_Hacker_Ethic_or_%E2%80%98work_as_play%E2%80%99
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=3.1.C._The_Hacker_Ethic_or_%E2%80%98work_as_play%E2%80%99&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=3.1.C._The_Hacker_Ethic_or_%E2%80%98work_as_play%E2%80%99&oldid=1130
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=3.1.C.\_The\_Hacker\_Ethic\_or\_%E2%80%98work\_as\_play%E2%80%99&oldid=1130]:
    ?title=3.1.C._The_Hacker_Ethic_or_%E2%80%98work_as_play%E2%80%99&oldid=1130
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
