[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

3.2 Explaining the Emergence of P2P Economics
=============================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**3.2 Explaining the Emergence of P2P Economics**

**3.2.A. Advantages of the free software/open sources production model**

[3.2.B. How far can peer production be extended?][]

**3.2.A. Advantages of the free software/open sources production model**

Why are free cooperative projects of autonomous agents, i.e. peer
production models, emerging now? Part of the explanation is cultural,
located in a changing set of values affecting large parts of the
population, mostly in the Western world. The World Values research by R.
Inglehart (Inglehart, 1989) has shown that there is a large number of
people who identify with post-material values and who have moved up in
the ‘hierarchy of values’ as defined by Abraham Maslow. For those people
who feel relatively secure materially, and are not taken in by the
infinite desires promoted by consumer society, it is inevitable that
they will look to other means of fulfillment, in the area of creation,
relationships, spirituality. The demand for free cooperation in a
context of self-unfolding of the individual, is a corollary of this
development. Just as the development of filesharing is related to the
existence of an abundance of unused computing resources due to the
differential between computer processing and human processing (the fact
that the latter is much slower creates the abundance in PC-resources),
P2P as a cultural phenomena is strongly related to the development of a
mass intellectually and the resulting abundance in creative resources.
Not only underemployment of these resources, but also the growing dearth
of meaning associated with working for a consumption-oriented
corporation, creates a surplus of creative labor that wants to invest in
meaningful projects associated with the direct creation of use value.

Apart from these cultural and 'subjective' reasons, there is of course
the availability of a global technological framework for non-local
communication, coordination and cooperation, it is strongly linked to
the emergence of the Internet. As we have outlined in our introduction,
there is now a peer to peer infrastructure available through distributed
computing, an alternative media and communication infrastructure, and a
platform for global autonomous cooperation. In general we can say that
it is access to distributed capital goods, that allows for the
generation of bottom-up ad hoc networks of people and devices. This fact
that 'capital outlays' can be generated without recourse to access to
financial capital or the means provided by the state or corporations, is
itself a huge advantage.

There are other good objective reasons that drive the adoption of 'open
collaborative processes: the very 'diffuse' nature of contemporary
innovation works against individual appropriation, since there are
myriads of inputs necessary to produce a given output, and were that
output to be frozen through rigid intellectual protection, it would
stifle the innovation process, and put these entities at a competitive
disadvantage .

By abolishing distinctions between producer and consumer, open source
processes dramatically increase their access to expertise, to a global
arena networked through the internet. No commercial entity can enlist
such a large army of volunteers. So one very clear advantage is the
availability of a much larger pool of intelligence which can be devoted
to problem-solving. Peer production, though often taken place through a
large number of small teams, also allows for swarming tactics, i.e. the
coordinated attention of many people. It is sometimes called the
'piranha effect' as it involves repeated tugging of code or text by many
different people, until the result is 'right' and communally validated.
Commercial software, which forbids other developers and users from
ameliorating it, is much more static in its development and has many
other flaws . With FLOSS (=Free Libre Open Sources Software) projects,
any user can participate, at least through a bug report, or by offering
his comments. This 'flexible degree of involvement' is a very important
characteristic of commons-based peer production, which usually combine a
very motivated core who operate in a onion-like structure surrounded by,
a flexible periphery of co-developers and occasional collaborators, with
many degrees in between, and all have the possibility of permanently
'modulating' their contributions for optimal fit in their personal
contexts. Indeed, because the cooperation is free, participants function
passionately and optimally without coercion.

The ‘Wisdom Game’, which means that social influence is gained through
reputation, augments the motivation to participate with high quality
interventions. In surveys of participants of such projects, the most
frequently cited motivation is the writing of the code itself, i.e. the
making of the software, and the associated ‘learning’ . Because a
self-unfolding logic is followed which looks for optimal feeling of
flow, the participants are collaborating when they feel most energized.
Open source availability of the source code and documentation means that
the products can be continuously improved. Because of the social control
and the reputation game, abusive behavior can be controlled and abuse of
power is similarly dependent on collective approval. Eric Raymond has
summarized the advantages of peer production in his seminal The
Cathedral and the Bazaar: 1) programmers motivated by real problems work
better than salary men who do not freely choose their area of work; 2)
"good programmers can write, but great programmers can rewrite", the
latter is greatly accelerated by the availability of open code; 3) more
users can see more bugs, the number of collaborators and available
brainpower is several orders of magnitude greater; 4) continuous
multiple corrections hasten development, while version control permits
falling back on earlier versions in case of instability of the new
version; 5) the Internet allowed global cooperation to occur.

In the sphere of immaterial production and distribution, such as for
example the distribution of music, the advantages of online distribution
through P2P processes are unmatched. In the sphere of material
production, through essentially the contributions of knowledge workers,
similarly P2P processes are more efficient than centralized hierarchical
control.

Yochai Benkler, in a famous essay, ‘Coase’s Penguin’, has given a
rationale for the emergence of P2P production methodologies, based on
the ideas of ‘transaction costs’. In the physical world, the cost of
bringing together thousands of participants may be very high, and so it
may be cheaper to have centralized firms than an open market. This is
why earlier experiences with collectivized economies could not work. But
in the immaterial sphere used for the production of informational goods,
the transaction goods are near-zero and therefore, open source
production methods are cheaper and more efficient. The example of
Thinkcycle , where open source methods are used for a large number of
projects, such as fighting cholera, show a wide applicability of the
method. Open source methods have already been applied with a certain
success in the biotechnogical field and is being proposed as an
alternative in an increasing number of new areas . An interesting twist
on the transaction cost theory of Yochai Benkler is given by Clay
Shirky, who explains the role of 'mental transaction costs' in the
'economy of attention', which to a large degree, explains the phenomenon
of 'gratuity' in internet publishing, and why payment schemes, including
micropayment, are so ineffective.

Aaron Krowne, writing for Free Software magazine, has proposed a set of
laws to explain the higher efficiency of CBPP (= Commons-based peer
production) models:

(Law 1.) When positive contributions exceed negative contributions by a
sufficient factor in a CBPP project, the project will be successful.

This means that for every contributor that can ‘mess things up’, there
have to be at least 10 others who can correct these mistakes. But in
most projects the ration is 1 to 100 or 1 to 1000, so that quality can
be maintained and improved over time.

(Law 2.) Cohesion quality is the quality of the presentation of the
concepts in a collaborative component (such as an encyclopedia entry).
Assuming the success criterion of Law 1 is met, cohesion quality of a
component will overall rise. However, it may temporarily decline. The
declines are by small amounts and the rises are by large amounts.

Individual contributions which may be useful by themselves but diminish
the overall balance of the project, will always be discovered, so that
decline can only be temporary.

(Corollary.) Laws 1 and 2 explain why cohesion quality of the entire
collection (or project) increases over time: the uncoordinated temporary
declines in cohesion quality cancel out with small rises in other
components, and the less frequent jumps in cohesion quality accumulate
to nudge the bulk average upwards. This is without even taking into
account coverage quality, which counts any conceptual addition as
positive, regardless of the elegance of its integration.

Retrieved from
"[?title=3.2\_Explaining\_the\_Emergence\_of\_P2P\_Economics&oldid=65414][]"

[Categories][]:

-   [Peerproduction][]
-   [Manufacturing][]
-   [P2P Theory][]

-   This page was last modified on 21 October 2012, at 19:07.
-   This page has been accessed 2,057 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /3.2_Explaining_the_Emergence_of_P2P_Economics
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:3.2_Explaining_the_Emergence_of_P2P_Economics&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /3.2_Explaining_the_Emergence_of_P2P_Economics
  [View source]: ?title=3.2_Explaining_the_Emergence_of_P2P_Economics&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=3.2_Explaining_the_Emergence_of_P2P_Economics&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=3.2+Explaining+the+Emergence+of+P2P+Economics
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/3.2_Explaining_the_Emergence_of_P2P_Economics
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/3.2_Explaining_the_Emergence_of_P2P_Economics
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=3.2_Explaining_the_Emergence_of_P2P_Economics&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=3.2_Explaining_the_Emergence_of_P2P_Economics&oldid=65414
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [3.2.B. How far can peer production be extended?]: /3.2.B._How_far_can_peer_production_be_extended%3F
    "3.2.B. How far can peer production be extended?"
  [?title=3.2\_Explaining\_the\_Emergence\_of\_P2P\_Economics&oldid=65414]:
    ?title=3.2_Explaining_the_Emergence_of_P2P_Economics&oldid=65414
  [Categories]: /Special:Categories "Special:Categories"
  [Peerproduction]: /Category:Peerproduction "Category:Peerproduction"
  [Manufacturing]: /Category:Manufacturing "Category:Manufacturing"
  [P2P Theory]: /Category:P2P_Theory "Category:P2P Theory"
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
