[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

3.3 Placing the P2P Era in an evolutionary framework
====================================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**3.3 Placing the P2P Era in an evolutionary framework**

**3.3.A. The evolution of cooperation: from neutrality to synergetics**

[3.3.B. The Evolution of Collective Intelligence][]

[3.3.C. Beyond Formalization, Institutionalization, Commodification][]

[3.3.D. The Evolution of Temporality: towards an Integral Time][]

\
 **3.3.A. The evolution of cooperation: from neutrality to synergetics**

In this section, we want to look at the basic characteristics of the
evolution of the mode of production , and in particular, how this
different forms tackle cooperation. It is perhaps useful to distinguish
the general concept of coordination , which does not involve people
cooperating together, but people working individidually in a chain,
being coordination through hierarchy or technology. With cooperation we
mean: working together and the following is an attempted history of the
modalities of such 'working together'.

The primary economy is based on reciprocity, which derives from common
ancestry or lineage. It is based on families, clans, tribes and exchange
mostly operates through gifts which create further obligation. The
division of labor is minimal and most often related to gender and age.
The key question is 'to belong or not to belong'. Social groups are
based and bounded by real or symbolic lineage. Wants are defined by the
community. Leadership is in the hands of the lineage leadership.

The secondary economy arises together with power monopolies which
engender coercion as a means to force cooperation. We enter the domain
of class societies, and production is organized by the elite in power,
which holds together through the symbolic power which transforms power
into allegiance. Respect for power, in the form of tribute, taxes, etc..
is normative. Distribution depends on your place in this chain of
symbolic power. Wants are defined by the symbolic power with symbolic
markers monopolized. The key question is: 'to deserve power or to
deserve subjection'. Social groups are bound by allegiance to power.
Leadership is political and religious. Relationships, i.e. allegiance,
is highly personal.

The tertiary economy arises with the entrepreneur and capitalism. It is
based on 'equivalent', i.e. 'fair' exchange, which is normative. Power
arises from relative productivity, relative monopoly over a needed good,
and from the wage relationship which creates dependence. Social groups
are loose, and wants are determined by advertising and mimetic desire.
Cooperation is no longer correlated to belonging. Relationships are
impersonal.

The quaternary economy, based on peer to peer processes, is based on
'ideological leaders' which can frame common goals and common belonging
and is based on membership and contribution. Contributing to the best of
one's ability to common goals is normative and the key question becomes:
to follow an existing group or to create one's own, i.e. to convince or
be convinced. Contributions to many groups can overlap. Power is
dependent on the power to convince.

How do these different formats tackle cooperation?

The earliest economic systems were based on the principle of
reciprocity, which was normative, but within the limits of kin groups
such as the family, the clan or the tribe. The so-called gift economy,
operated in a context of abundance (this counter-intuitive analysis is
well explained by anthropologists such as Marshall Sahlins (Sahlins,
1972), who showed that tribal peoples only needed to work a few hours
per day for their physical survival needs), created a circle of
obligations. Cooperation was therefore not free, but an obligation
associated to belonging. Moreover, the cooperation engendered by
reciprocity was balanced by a competition for prestige, that took the
form of giving, and very often, of the destruction of goods in
gift-giving festivals. It seems therefore correct to say that the
surplus was not re-invested, did not create permanent classes, and was
not geared on enhancing productivity.

After the breakdown of the tribal gift economies, we can see that
premodern imperial and feudal forms of human cooperation where based on
the use of force (the transition from egalitarian Neolithic villages to
class-based Sumerian cities such as Akkad took place in the 4th
millennium B.C.).

Using Edward Haskell’s triune categorization of human cooperation
(adversarial, neutral, synergetic, Haskell, 1972): It was a win-lose
game, which inevitably led to the monopolization of power (either in
land and military forces in precapitalist formations, or in the
commercial sphere, as in capitalism). Tribute was exacted from losers in
a battle (or freely offered by the weak seeking protection), labor and
produce from slaves and serfs. In forced, adversarial cooperation, in
this win-loose game, cooperative surplus is less than optimal, it is in
fact negative: 1 + 1 is less than two. Productivity and motivation are
relatively low. Nevertheless, the ability to commandeer and organize
vast resources, and a further division of labor, increased the
productivity of such societies, as compared with the tribal economies,
and they could sustain a class society with a vast army of warriors and
spiritual leaders. But the competitive game was not geared on increasing
the productivity of existing resources, but on the control of a bigger
scope of resources, i.e. land and people, through military conquest.

In capitalist society, neutral cooperation is introduced. In theory,
free workers exchange their labor for a fair salary and producers and
consumers exchange products for a ‘fair’ amount of money. In neutral
cooperation, the result of the cooperation is average. Participants give
just their money’s worth. Neither participant in a neutral exchange gets
better, 1 plus 1 equals 2. We can interpret this negatively or
positively. Negatively, capitalist theory is rarely matched in practice,
where fair exchange is always predicated on monopolization and power
relationships, not in the form of direct coercion (except in the phase
of 'primitive accumulation' of capital, in the 16th and 17th century,
where coerced power was still very prevalent). The situation is
therefore much darker, more adversarial and less neutral, than the
theory would suggest. Nevertheless, compared to the earlier feudal
models, marked by constant warfare, the monopoly of violence exercised
by the capitalist state model, limits internal armed conflicts, and
adversarial relationships are relegated to the sphere of commerce, or
'externalized'.

The system has proven very productive, and coupled with the distributive
nature of the welfare state which was imposed on it, has dramatically
expanded living standards in certain areas of the world. Seen in the
most positive light, a positive feedback loop may be created in which
both partners feel they are winning, thus it can sometimes be seen as a
win-win model. But what it cannot do, due to its inherent competitive
nature, is transform itself into a win-win-win model (or in the
formulation of Timothy Wilken of synearth.net, a win-win-win-win model,
with the biosphere as fourth partner). A capitalist relationship cannot
freely care for the wider environment, only forced to care. (This is the
rationale for regulation, as self-regulation generally proves even more
unsatisfactory in terms of the general interest of the wider public and
the survival of the biosphere)

Here peer to peer can be again defined as a clear evolutionary
breakthrough. It is based on free cooperation. Parties to the process
all get better from it: In Wilken's formulation: 1 plus 1 gives a lot
more than 2. By definition, peer to peer processes are mobilized for
common projects that are of greater use value to the wider community
(since monetized exchange value falls away). True and authentic P2P
therefore logically transforms into a win-win-win model, whereby not
only the parties gain, but the wider community and social field as well.
It is, in Edward Haskell’s definition, a true synergetic cooperation. It
is very important to see the ‘energetic’ effects of these different
forms of cooperation, as I indicated above: 1) forced cooperation yields
very low quality contributions; 2) the neutral cooperation format of the
marketplace generates average quality contributions; 3) but freely given
synergistic cooperation generates passion. Participants are
automatically drawn to what they do best, at the moments at which they
are most passionate and energetic about it. This is one of the
fundamental reasons of the superior quality which is eventually, over
time, created through open source projects.

Arthur Coulter, author of a book on synergetics (Coulter, 1976), adds a
further twist explaining the superiority of P2P. He adds to the
objective definition of Haskell, the subjective definition of ‘rapport’
based on the attitudes of the participants. Rapport is the state of a
persons who are in full agreement, and is determined by synergy,
empathy, and communication. Synergy refers to interactions that promote
the goals and efforts of the participants; empathy to the mutual
understanding of the goals; and communication to the effective
interchange of the data. His “Principle of Equivalence�? states that the
flow of S + E + C are optimal when they have equivalent status to each
other. If we distinguish Acting Superior, Acting Inferior on one axis
and Acting Supportively and Acting with Hostility on another axis, then
the optimal flow arises when one treats the other as ‘somewhat superior’
and with ‘some support’. Thus an egalitarian-supportive attitude is
congenial to the success of P2P.

Above we have focused on the means of cooperation, but another important
aspect is the 'scope' of cooperation, or the amount or 'volume' of what
can be shared, in both relative and absolute terms.

This is how Kim Veltman, a Dutch academic, echoed by evolutionary
psychologist John Steward puts it:

“Major advances in civilization typically entail a change in medium,
which increases greatly the scope of what can be shared. Havelock noted
that the shift from oral to written culture entailed a dramatic increase
in the amount of knowledge shared and led to a re-organization of
knowledge. McLuhan and Giesecke explored what happened when Gutenberg
introduced print culture in Europe. The development of printing went
hand in hand with the rise of early modern science. In the sixteenth
century, the rise of vernacular printing helped spread new knowledge.
From the mid-seventeenth century onwards this again increased as learned
correspondence became the basis for a new category of learned journals
(Journal des savants, Journal of the Royal Society, Göttinger Gelehrten
Anzeiger etc.), whence expressions such as the "world of letters. The
advent of Internet marks a radical increase in this trend towards
sharing.
“([http://erste.oekonux-konferenz.de/dokumentation/texte/veltman.html][])

In a similar vein, a French philosopher, Jean-Louis Sagot-Duvauroux
(Sagot-Duvauroux, 1995), who wrote the book, “Pour la Gratuite�?,
stresses that many spheres of life are not dominated by state or
capital, that these are all based on free and equal exchange, and that
the extension of these spheres is synonymous with civilization-building
. The very fact that the cooperation takes place in the sphere of free
and non-monetary exchange of the Information Commons, is a sign of
civilisational advance. By contrast, the 'monetarisation of everything'
(commodification) that is a hallmark of cognitive capitalism, is a sign
of de-civilization .

Recent developments concerning the participatory culture on the internet
have stimulated the discipline of cooperation studies , which study how
to promote human cooperation. For example, they are trying to determine
the maximum number to obtain efficient non-hierarchically cooperating
groups, beyond which centralization and hierarchy sets in.

Retrieved from
"[?title=3.3\_Placing\_the\_P2P\_Era\_in\_an\_evolutionary\_framework&oldid=1695][]"

-   This page was last modified on 16 November 2005, at 09:22.
-   This page has been accessed 1,336 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /3.3_Placing_the_P2P_Era_in_an_evolutionary_framework
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:3.3_Placing_the_P2P_Era_in_an_evolutionary_framework&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /3.3_Placing_the_P2P_Era_in_an_evolutionary_framework
  [View source]: ?title=3.3_Placing_the_P2P_Era_in_an_evolutionary_framework&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=3.3_Placing_the_P2P_Era_in_an_evolutionary_framework&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=3.3+Placing+the+P2P+Era+in+an+evolutionary+framework
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/3.3_Placing_the_P2P_Era_in_an_evolutionary_framework
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/3.3_Placing_the_P2P_Era_in_an_evolutionary_framework
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=3.3_Placing_the_P2P_Era_in_an_evolutionary_framework&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=3.3_Placing_the_P2P_Era_in_an_evolutionary_framework&oldid=1695
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [3.3.B. The Evolution of Collective Intelligence]: /3.3.B._The_Evolution_of_Collective_Intelligence
    "3.3.B. The Evolution of Collective Intelligence"
  [3.3.C. Beyond Formalization, Institutionalization, Commodification]: /3.3.C._Beyond_Formalization,_Institutionalization,_Commodification
    "3.3.C. Beyond Formalization, Institutionalization, Commodification"
  [3.3.D. The Evolution of Temporality: towards an Integral Time]: /3.3.D._The_Evolution_of_Temporality:_towards_an_Integral_Time
    "3.3.D. The Evolution of Temporality: towards an Integral Time"
  [http://erste.oekonux-konferenz.de/dokumentation/texte/veltman.html]: http://erste.oekonux-konferenz.de/dokumentation/texte/veltman.html
  [?title=3.3\_Placing\_the\_P2P\_Era\_in\_an\_evolutionary\_framework&oldid=1695]:
    ?title=3.3_Placing_the_P2P_Era_in_an_evolutionary_framework&oldid=1695
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
