[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

3.4 Placing P2P in an intersubjective typology
==============================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**3.4 Placing P2P in an intersubjective typology**

**3.4.A. P2P, The Gift Economy and Communal Shareholding**

[3.4.B. P2P and the Market][]

[3.4.C. P2P and the Commons][]

**3.4.A. P2P, The Gift Economy and Communal Shareholding**

In my opinion, there is a profound misconception regarding peer to peer,
expressed by the various authors who call it a gift economy, such as
Richard Barbrook (Barbrook, 1995), or Steven Weber (Weber, 2004). But,
as Stephan Merten of Oekonux.de has already argued, P2P production
methods are not a gift economy based on equal sharing, but a form of
communal shareholding based on participation. In a gift economy if you
give something, the receiving party has to return if not the gift, then
something of at least comparable value (in fact the original tribal gift
economy was more about creating relationships and obligations and a
means to evacuate excess, since they did not need it for their basic
survival needs ). In a participative system such as communal
shareholding, organized around a common resource, anyone can use or
contribute according to his need and inclinations.

Let me give a context to this claim by introducing the typology of
intersubjective relations, as defined by anthropologist Alan Page Fiske
(Fiske, 1993). There are he says, historically and across all cultures,
only four basic types of relating to one another, which form a grammar
of human relationships, these are Authority Ranking, Equality Matching,
Market Pricing, and Communal Shareholding. From the following
description, one can deduce that P2P does not correspond to Equality
Matching, which is the principle behind a gift economy, but to Communal
Shareholding.

“People use just four fundamental models for organizing most aspects of
sociality most of the time in all cultures . These models are Communal
Sharing, Authority Ranking, Equality Matching, and Market Pricing.
Communal Sharing (CS) is a relationship in which people treat some dyad
or group as equivalent and undifferentiated with respect to the social
domain in question. Examples are people using a commons (CS with respect
to utilization of the particular resource), people intensely in love (CS
with respect to their social selves), people who "ask not for whom the
bell tolls, for it tolls for thee" (CS with respect to shared suffering
and common well-being), or people who kill any member of an enemy group
indiscriminately in retaliation for an attack (CS with respect to
collective responsibility). In Authority Ranking (AR) people have
asymmetric positions in a linear hierarchy in which subordinates defer,
respect, and (perhaps) obey, while superiors take precedence and take
pastoral responsibility for subordinates. Examples are military
hierarchies (AR in decisions, control, and many other matters), ancestor
worship (AR in offerings of filial piety and expectations of protection
and enforcement of norms), monotheistic religious moralities (AR for the
definition of right and wrong by commandments or will of God), social
status systems such as class or ethnic rankings (AR with respect to
social value of identities), and rankings such as sports team standings
(AR with respect to prestige). AR relationships are based on perceptions
of legitimate asymmetries, not coercive power; they are not inherently
exploitative (although they may involve power or cause harm).

In Equality Matching relationships people keep track of the balance or
difference among participants and know what would be required to restore
balance. Common manifestations are turn-taking, one-person one-vote
elections, equal share distributions, and vengeance based on
an-eye-for-an-eye, a-tooth-for-a-tooth. Examples include sports and
games (EM with respect to the rules, procedures, equipment and terrain),
baby-sitting coops (EM with respect to the exchange of child care), and
restitution in-kind (EM with respect to righting a wrong). Market
Pricing relationships are oriented to socially meaningful ratios or
rates such as prices, wages, interest, rents, tithes, or cost-benefit
analyses. Money need not be the medium, and MP relationships need not be
selfish, competitive, maximizing, or materialistic—any of the four
models may exhibit any of these features. MP relationships are not
necessarily individualistic; a family may be the CS or AR unit running a
business that operates in an MP mode with respect to other enterprises.
Examples are property that can be bought, sold, or treated as investment
capital (land or objects as MP), marriages organized contractually or
implicitly in terms of costs and benefits to the partners, prostitution
(sex as MP), bureaucratic cost-effectiveness standards (resource
allocation as MP), utilitarian judgments about the greatest good for the
greatest number, or standards of equity in judging entitlements in
proportion to contributions (two forms of morality as MP),
considerations of "spending time" efficiently, and estimates of expected
kill ratios (aggression as MP). “ (source: Fiske website)

From the above description, it should be clear that the tribal gift
economy is a form of sharing, based on ‘equal’ parts, according to a
specific criteria of ‘what it is that functions as common standard for
comparison’. Thus in the tribal economy, when a clan or tribe (or the
members of such) gives away its surplus, the recipient group or
individual is forced to eventually give back, say the next year, at
least as much, or they will loose relative prestige. What such a gift
economy does however is create a community of obligations and
reciprocity, unlike the market-based mechanisms, where 'equal is traded
with equal', and every transaction stands alone.

Similarly, in the feudal social redistribution mechanism, the rich and
powerful compete in the gift giving to Church or Sangha, as a matter of
prestige. In this case, what they receive back is not other material
gifts, but, on the one hand social prestige, and on the other hand, the
immaterial benefits of 'better karma' ('merit' in S.E. Asian Buddhism),
or being closer to salvation (in the form of indulgences in medieval
Christianity). In the gift economy, "something" is always being
exchanged

This is not the mechanism that operates in the sphere of knowledge
exchange on the internet. In open source production, filesharing, or
knowledge exchange communities, I freely contribute, what I can, what I
want, without obligation; on the recipient side, one simply takes what
one needs. It is common for any web-based project to have let’s say 10%
active contributing members, and 90% passive lurkers. This can be an
annoyance, but is never a ‘fundamental problem’, for the very reason
that P2P operates in a sphere of abundance, where a tragedy of the
commons, an abuse of common property, cannot occur, or at least, not in
the classical sense. In the concept of Tragedy of the Commons , communal
holdings are depleted and abused, because they belong to no one and also
because physical goods are limited 'rival' goods, they can be taken
away. The conflict is between the collective interest for preserving the
Commons, and the individual incentive to abuse it for one's own personal
benefit. We should note how this theory is based on a 'unregulated'
Commons, leaving it without defense against individual predation, and it
is therefore misleading as a general theory of the Commons.

But in the Information Commons created through P2P processes, the value
of the collective knowledge base is not diminished by use, but on the
contrary enhanced by it: it is governed, in John Frow's words, by a
Comedy of the Commons, or using a similar metaphor, producing a
Cornucopia of the Commons. This is so because of the network effect,
which makes resources more valuable the more they are used. Think about
the example of the fax, which was relatively useless until a critical
mass of users was reached. And the goods are immaterial, and thus
'non-rival', which means that they can be replicated or replenished
without cost , they cannot be monopolized (unless by law and licenses,
hence the intellectual property wars). It is when these 'network
externalities' are at play, that the Commons form seems to be the most
appropriate, functioning better than with individual private property.
From the point of view of the individual users themselves, who act in
their own interest, what P2P systems do is to mobilize what the
economists call ‘positive externalities’ . These are benefits generated
by user resources or behaviour, which are lost if they are not used by
others or a collective, but do not generate negative side effect for the
user either.

What the better P2P systems do is to make such participation, such
sharing of positive externalities, ‘automatic’, so that even passive use
becomes useful participation for the system as a whole. Think of how
BitTorrent makes any user who downloads a resource, in his/her turn a
resource for others to use, unbeknownst and independent of any conscious
action of the user . Say I have a team working on a software project,
and it creates a special email system to communicate around development
issues. This communication is considered a common resource and archived,
and thus, without any conscious effort of the participating members,
automatically augments the common resource base. One of the key elements
in the success of P2P projects, and the key to overcoming any ‘free
rider’ problem, is therefore to develop technologies of “Participation
Capture" (see the endnote on how my concept differs from both panoptical
surveillance and 'sousveillance' ).

There are of course new social problems arising with P2P, some of which
we do not know yet, and some, already occurring, which are related to
the quality of social behavior, but interestingly, these problems are
tackled through the collective as well. For example, Clay Shirky, one of
the most astute observers of the new social networking sphere, has
observed how 'flaming', which can be a serious problem in mailing lists,
has been seriously attenuated by blogs and wiki's, through a focus on
'social design' . Shirky shows how the design, the protocols in
Galloway's view, have to move away from a focus on the personal user
facing a box, towards a recognition of the social usage of these
technologies.

The social logic of information and resource sharing is a cultural
reversal vis a vis the information retention logic of hierarchical
social systems. Participation is assumed, and non-participation has to
be justified. Information sharing, the public good status of your
information, is assumed, and it is secrecy which has to be justified.

So what people are doing in P2P systems, is participating, and doing so
they are creating a ‘commons’. Unlike traditional Communal Shareholding,
which starts from already existing physical resources, in peer to peer,
the knowledge commons is created through participation, and does not
exist ‘ex ante’.

All of the above argumentation leads to the conclusion that P2P is not a
Equality Matching model (and not a Market Pricing Model), but Communal
Shareholding. These arguments have an ideological subtext. The reason I
am stressing this analysis is to counter neoliberal dogma that humans
are only motivated by greed. Saying that P2P is a gift economy requires
a strict accounting of the exchange. Or saying that such participation
is motivated by the quest for reputation only, or that it is a game to
obtain attention, corresponds to this same ideology which cannot accept
that humans also have a ‘cooperative’ nature, and that it can thrive in
the right conditions. Our aim is not to deny that humans have these
characteristics, but only to point out that cooperation and altruism are
just as constitutive of who we are, and given the right institutional
conditions and moral development, the latter rather than the former can
be enhanced. There is no need to 'reduce' the characteristics in a
one-sided manner, but rather to recognize the subtle richness and
combinations of who we are, and to develop the right kind of
institutions and knowledge (such as the new field of cooperation
studies) to strengthen the latter's potentialities.

Though the early traditional gift economy was spiritually motivated and
experienced as a set of obligations, which created reciprocity and
relationships, involving honor and allegiance (as explained by Marcel
Mauss in the Gift), since gifts were nevertheless made in a context of
obligatory return, it involved a kind of thinking that is quite
different from the gratuity that is characteristic of P2P: giving to a
P2P project is explicitly not done for an 'certain' and individual
return of the gift, but for the use value, for the learning involved,
for reputational benefits perhaps, but only indirectly.

The above does not mean that P2P is unrelated to the contemporary
revival of gift economy applications. Local Exchange Trading Systems,
which are springing up in many places, are forms of Equality Matching,
and, from an 'egalitarian' point of view, they may be preferable to
Market Pricing mechanisms, since for them, any hour of labor has an
equal value. Both P2P as ‘Communal Shareholding’, and contemporary
expressions of the gift economy ethos, are part of the same ‘spirit’ of
‘gifting’, or of free cooperation. Substantial numbers of participants
to P2P projects freely give, as do participants in LETS systems and
other schemes. The difference is in the expectation that they will
receive something specific and of equal value in return.

But what P2P technologies do is that they enable the creation of
information-rich exchanges with dramatically lower transactional costs,
thereby enabling gift economy applications, what Yochai Benkler calls a
'sharing economy', as well as numerous P2P-based market exchanges, which
were not economical before. P2P is therefore conducive to a support of
the growth of a gift economy based on its technology, while gifting and
sharing practices are strengthened by the P2P ethos as well.

Retrieved from
"[?title=3.4\_Placing\_P2P\_in\_an\_intersubjective\_typology&oldid=17138][]"

-   This page was last modified on 9 December 2007, at 15:41.
-   This page has been accessed 2,149 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /3.4_Placing_P2P_in_an_intersubjective_typology
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:3.4_Placing_P2P_in_an_intersubjective_typology&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /3.4_Placing_P2P_in_an_intersubjective_typology
  [View source]: ?title=3.4_Placing_P2P_in_an_intersubjective_typology&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=3.4_Placing_P2P_in_an_intersubjective_typology&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=3.4+Placing+P2P+in+an+intersubjective+typology
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/3.4_Placing_P2P_in_an_intersubjective_typology
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/3.4_Placing_P2P_in_an_intersubjective_typology
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=3.4_Placing_P2P_in_an_intersubjective_typology&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=3.4_Placing_P2P_in_an_intersubjective_typology&oldid=17138
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [3.4.B. P2P and the Market]: /3.4.B._P2P_and_the_Market
    "3.4.B. P2P and the Market"
  [3.4.C. P2P and the Commons]: /3.4.C._P2P_and_the_Commons
    "3.4.C. P2P and the Commons"
  [?title=3.4\_Placing\_P2P\_in\_an\_intersubjective\_typology&oldid=17138]:
    ?title=3.4_Placing_P2P_in_an_intersubjective_typology&oldid=17138
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
