[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

3. P2P in the Economic Sphere
=============================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**3. P2P in the Economic Sphere**

**3.1.A. Peer production as a third mode of production**

[3.1.B. The Communism of Capital, or, the cooperative nature of
cognitive capitalism][]

[3.1.C. The Hacker Ethic or ‘work as play’][]

[3.2 Explaining the Emergence of P2P Economics][]

[3.3 Placing the P2P Era in an evolutionary framework][]

[3.4 Placing P2P in an intersubjective typology][]

-   -   -   -   

**3.1.A. Peer production as a third mode of production**

There are two important aspects to the emergence of P2P in the economic
sphere. On the one hand, as format for peer production processes (called
‘Commons-based peer production' or CBPP by Y. Benckler ) it is emerging
as a 'third mode of production' based on the cooperation of autonomous
agents. Indeed, if the first mode of production is free-market based
capitalism, and the second mode was the now defunct model of a
centrally-planned state-owned economy, then the third mode is defined
neither by the motor of profit, nor by any central planning. In order to
allocate resources and make decisions, it is neither using market and
pricing mechanisms, nor managerial commands, but social relations.

\
 The second aspect, as the juridical underpinning of software creation,
in the form of the General Public License, or as the Creative Commons
license for other creative content, it is engendering a new
commons-based intellectual property regime. Taken together the GPL, the
Open Source Initiative and the Creative Commons, together with
associated initiatives such as the Art Libre license, may be seen as
providing the 'legal' infrastructure for the emergence and growth of the
P2P social formation. Peer production proper covers the first aspect:
freely cooperating producers, governing themselves through peer
governance, and producing a new type of universal common goods. The
second aspect, mostly as free software and open sources, is the result
of that process, but not necessarily. It is possible that corporations
would produce free software (accessible and modifiable for free), in a
more traditional way, or in a hybrid way, now that many large
corporations are embracing open sources, this is increasingly the case.

But what is important for us is the following: worldwide, groups of
programmers and other experts are engaging in the cooperative production
of immaterial goods with important use value, mostly new software
systems, but not exclusively. And as we will see later, peer production
is much broader than software, it emerges thoughout the social field.
The new software, hardware and other immaterial products thus being
created are at the same time new means of production, since the computer
is now a universal machine ‘in charge of everything’ (every productive
action that can be broken down in logical steps can be directed by a
computer). Access to computer technology is distributed, and thus widely
affordable given a minimum of financial means, and technological
literacy. This means that the old dichotomy, between workers and the
means of production, is in the process of being overcome for certain
areas of fixed capital, and that the emergence of the viral communicator
model, technological meshworks, is extending this model of distributed
access to fixed capital assets, to more and more areas. Important to
note is that software is 'active text' which directly results in
'processes'. In other words, software is not just an immaterial pursuit,
but can actively direct material and industrial processes. As a
cooperation format, we will discuss it in more detail in the section
'Advantages of the peer production model'. Peer governance models will
also be discussed elsewhere.

A further important aspect of peer production is the creation of
universal public goods, i.e. the emergence of new common property
regimes. As creation of a new type of commons, it takes the form of
either the Free Software Movement ethos , as defined by Richard Stallman
(Stallman, 2002 ), or in the form of Open Source projects, as first
defined by Eric Raymond (Raymond, 2001). Both are innovative
developments of copyright that significantly transcend the implications
of privaty property and its restrictions. However, the ethos underlying
both initiatives is different, While the Free Software Foundation
insists that its production is not for exchange on the market, and not
to be converted into private property, the Open Source Iniative aims to
be compatible with the market and business thinking and stresses the
efficiency argument which results from a public domain of software.

Free software is essentially 'open code'. Its General Public Licence
says that anyone using free software must give subsequent users at least
the same rights as they themselves received: total freedom to see the
code, to change it, to improve it and to distribute it . There is some
discussion as to whether Free Software must be 'free', in the sense of
free beer . While its spokesmen, including Richard Stallman, clearly say
that it is okay to charge for such software, the obligation of free
distribution makes this a rather moot argument. The companies that sell
software, such as Red Hat, which sells version of Linux, could be said
to charge for the services attached to its installation and use, rather
than for the freely distributable software itself. This is an important
argument for those stressing, as I do, the essential non-mercantile
nature of free software. But in any case, if in a for-profit enterprise
software is developed so that it can be sold as a product, in the case
of free software, if it is sold by non-commercial entities or the
programmers themselves, it is most often as a means of producing more
software, to strengthen the community and obtain financial independence
to continue further projects.

FS explicitely rejects the ownership of software, since every user has
the right to distribute the code, and to adapt it and is thus
explicitely founded on a philosophy of participation and 'sharing'. Open
Sources is admittedly less radical: it accepts ownership of software,
but renders that ownership feeble since users and other developers have
full right to use and change it . But since the OS model has been
specifically designed to soften its acceptance by the business community
which is now increasingly involved in its development , it generally
leads to a lot more control of the labor process, including the use of
traditional corporate processes. OS licenses allow segments of code to
be used in proprietary and commercial projects, something impossible
with pure free software. But even free software projects have become
increasingly professionalised , and it now generally consists of a core
of often paid professionals, funded by either nonprofits or by
corporations having an interest in its continued expansion; they also
use professional project management systems, as is the case for Linux.
Despite their differences or essential likeness – a matter of continuous
debate in both FS and OS communities -- I will use both concepts more
for their underlying similarity, without my use denoting a preference,
but on a personal level would be probably closer to the free software
model, which is the 'purer' form of commons-based peer production.

Despite it rootedness as a modification of intellectual property rights,
both do have the effect of creating a kind of public domain in software,
and can be considered as part of the information commons . However, the
GPL does that by completely preserving the authorship of its creators.
Free software and open sources are exemplary of the double nature of
peer to peer that we will discuss later: it is both within the system,
but partly transcends it. Though it is increasingly attractive to
economic forces for its efficiency, the profit motive is not the core of
why these systems are taken up, it is much more about the use value of
the products. You could say that they are part of a new 'for-benefit'
sector, which also includes the NGO's, social entrepreneurs and what the
Europeans call 'the social economy', and that is arising next to the
'for-profit' economy of private corporations. Studies show that the
personal development of participants are primary motives, despite the
fact that quite a few programmers are now paid for their efforts .
Whatever the motives though, in a sense 'it doesn't matter' since in the
open and global environment create by the internet, there is always a
sufficient number of people willing to cooperate on any given project.
Open Sources explicitely promotes itself through its value to create
more efficient software in the business environment. It is even being
embraced by corporate interests such as IBM and other Microsoft rivals,
as a way to bypass the latter's monopoly, but the creation of an open
infrastructure is clearly crucial and in everyone’s interest. But
through the generalization of a cooperative mode of working , and
through its overturning of the limits of property, which normally
forbids other developers and users to study and ameliorate the source
code, it is beyond the property model, contrary to the authoritarian,
bureaucratic, or 'feudal' modes of corporate governance; and beyond the
profit motive. We should also note that we have here the emergence of a
mode of production that can be entirely devoid of a manufacturer . In
the words of Doc Searls, senior editor of Linux magazine, we see the
demand-side supplying itself .

In conclusion:

Seen from the point of view of capitalism or private for-profit
interests, commons-based peer production has the following advantages :
1) it represents more productive ways of working and of mobilizing
external communities to its own purposes ; 2) it represents a means of
externalizing costs or of lowering transaction costs ; 3) it represents
new types of business models based on 'customer-made production', such
as eBay and Amazon; 4) it represents new service-based business models,
where by free software is used as the basis of providing surrounding
services (Red Hat); 5) it represents a common shared infrastructure
whose costs and building is taken up largely by the community and which
prohibits both monopolistic control by stronger rivals as well as
providing common standards so that a market can develop around it. In
all these senses FS/OS forms of peer production are 'within the system'.

We should also stress the dependence of the peer production community to
the existing system. Since producers are not paid for their services,
they have to work within the mainstream economy: for the government or
academia, for traditional corporations, running their own individual or
small business, or moving from project to project. Thus, despite its
growth, peer production is still relatively weak. Though it outcompetes
its for-profit rivals in efficiency, though it increases the welfare of
its producers, though it creates important use value, it only covers
part of the economy, mostly immaterial processes, while the mainstream,
capitalist economy, functions as a full system. In this sense, peer to
peer is immanent in the system, and productive of capitalism itself, as
we have shown in the first chapter. But it is also more than that, a
transcendent element that goes beyond the larger system of which it is a
part. It is a germ of something new: it still goes 'beyond' the existing
system.

To summarise the importance of the 'transcending' factors of
Commons-based peer production: 1) it is based on free cooperation, not
on the selling of one's labour in exchange of a wage, nor motivated
primarily by profit or for the exchange value of the resulting product;
2) it not managed by a traditional hierarchy, but through new modes of
peer governance; 3) it does not need a manufacturer; 4) it's an
innovative application of copyright which creates an information commons
and transcends the limitations attached to both the private (for-profit)
and public (state-based) property forms. It creates a new type of
universal common property.

How widespread are these developments? Open-source based computers are
already the mainstay of the internet’s infrastructure (Apache servers);
Linux is an alternative operating system that is taking the world by
storm . It is now a practical possibility to operating system that is
taking the world by storm . It is now a practical possibility to create
an Open Source personal computer that exclusively uses OS software
products for the desktop, including database, accounting, graphical
programs, including browsers such as Firefox . It is recognized as its
main threat by the current operating system monopoly Microsoft . As a
collaborative method to produce software, it is being used increasingly
by various businesses and institutions . Wikipedia is an alternative
encyclopedia produced by the internet community which is rapidly gaining
in quantity, quality, and number of users. And there are several
thousands of such projects, involving at least several millions of
cooperating individuals. If we consider blogging as a form of
journalistic production, then it must be noted that it already involves
between 5 and 10 million bloggers, with the most popular ones achieving
several hundred thousands of visitors. We are pretty much in an era of
‘open source everything’, with musicians and other artists using it as
well for collaborative online productions. In general it can be said
that this mode of production achieves ‘products’ that are at least as
good, and often better than their commercial counterparts. In addition,
there are solid reasons to accept that, if the open source methodology
is consistently used over time, the end result can only be better
alternatives, since they involved mobilization of vastly most resources
than commercial products.

Open source production operates in a wider economic context, of which we
would like to describe ‘the communism of capital’, with ‘the hacker
ethic’ functioning as the basis of it’s new work culture.

*Figure – Choosing for a Open Source Desktop*: NOT AVAILABLE IN WIKI
VERSION

Retrieved from
"[?title=3.\_P2P\_in\_the\_Economic\_Sphere&oldid=1699][]"

-   This page was last modified on 16 November 2005, at 09:30.
-   This page has been accessed 4,411 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /3._P2P_in_the_Economic_Sphere "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: /Talk:3._P2P_in_the_Economic_Sphere
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /3._P2P_in_the_Economic_Sphere
  [View source]: ?title=3._P2P_in_the_Economic_Sphere&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=3._P2P_in_the_Economic_Sphere&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=3.+P2P+in+the+Economic+Sphere
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/3._P2P_in_the_Economic_Sphere
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/3._P2P_in_the_Economic_Sphere
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=3._P2P_in_the_Economic_Sphere&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=3._P2P_in_the_Economic_Sphere&oldid=1699
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [3.1.B. The Communism of Capital, or, the cooperative nature of
  cognitive capitalism]: /3.1.B._The_Communism_of_Capital,_or,_the_cooperative_nature_of_cognitive_capitalism
    "3.1.B. The Communism of Capital, or, the cooperative nature of cognitive capitalism"
  [3.1.C. The Hacker Ethic or ‘work as play’]: /3.1.C._The_Hacker_Ethic_or_%E2%80%98work_as_play%E2%80%99
    "3.1.C. The Hacker Ethic or ‘work as play’"
  [3.2 Explaining the Emergence of P2P Economics]: /3.2_Explaining_the_Emergence_of_P2P_Economics
    "3.2 Explaining the Emergence of P2P Economics"
  [3.3 Placing the P2P Era in an evolutionary framework]: /3.3_Placing_the_P2P_Era_in_an_evolutionary_framework
    "3.3 Placing the P2P Era in an evolutionary framework"
  [3.4 Placing P2P in an intersubjective typology]: /3.4_Placing_P2P_in_an_intersubjective_typology
    "3.4 Placing P2P in an intersubjective typology"
  [?title=3.\_P2P\_in\_the\_Economic\_Sphere&oldid=1699]: ?title=3._P2P_in_the_Economic_Sphere&oldid=1699
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
