[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

4.1.F. New lines of contention: Information Commons vs. New Enclosures
======================================================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**4.1.F. New lines of contention: Information Commons vs. New
Enclosures**

Next to new forms of political organization, new conceptions regarding
the tactics and strategies of struggle, the emergence of peer to peer
also generates new conflicts, which are different from those of the
industrial age. Just as the industrial mode of relations created the
labor movement and the idea that the workers could own the means of
production, the new social formation creates a movement that is favoring
the common construction of a Information Commons, associated not with
state property or “nationalization", but with universal common access
property regimes. Positively, what binds many different social and
political movements today is their focus on ‘open access’: to software
code (open sources), to scientific information (open access to archives,
open science), to the traditional knowledge of humanity (the movement
against biopiracy), against the privatization of human life
(privatization of the genome ). One gets the distinct impression that
our current political economy, originally designed to manage scarcity in
order to overcome it, is changing into a system that seeks to
permanently create artificial scarcity, in order to create knowledge
monopolies and dependencies.

The key conflict is therefore the one about the freedom to construct the
Information Commons , which encompasses what was traditionally called
the ‘public domain’ , as against the private appropriation of knowledge
by for-profit firms . All these different Commons-related struggle share
common characteristics, and Philippe Aigrain has examined, in his book
'Cause Commune' (Aigrain, 2005), how these different forces can unite in
common struggle .

According to the Hacker Manifesto by McKenzie Wark, the deeper reason
and underlying common logic between these different struggles is the
struggle for control of both information (as intellectual property) and
the vectors of information (needed for distribution), between those that
produce information, knowledge and innovation (the hacker class,
knowledge workers), and the groups that own the vectors (the vector
class), through which its exchange value can be realized. This same
vision of a class struggle between the producers of information and
those that want to resell prepackaged bits of it for sale back to
consumers, is shared by Joel de Rosnay who speaks of ‘pronetarians vs.
infocapitalists’.

The last 30 years have indeed seen an enormous extension of Intellectual
Property Rights, resulting in a severe weakening of the Scientific
Commons, a variety of detrimental social effects, while new technical
developments such as Digital Rights Management threaten the development
of a free culture. Cognitive capitalism is centered around the
accumulation of knowledge assets, and has altered the classic cycle of
consumption and production. In the industrial economy this cycle was
described as conception-production-distribution- consumption. In this
economy, over time, competition would arise, making the products
cheaper, forcing corporations to become either more productive or invent
new products. In the new economy, the cycle is better described as
conception – reproduction of the informational basis – production –
distribution – consumption. The informational basis, whether it is
software, cultural content, or material products such as seeds in
agribusiness, molecules and gene sequences in the pharmaceutical
industry, are protected through information property rights. The aspect
of production and distribution is no longer central, and can be easily
outsourced. This mechanism has now extended to vast sectors of the
'material economy' with companies such as Nike and Alcatel as companies
that are essentially divested of material production, but are centered
around their knowledge and other immaterial assets (essentially
'branding')

Through this mechanism of IP protection, super-profits can be
maintained, common pools of knowledge are destroyed and appropriated,
and innovation is slowed down. In agribusiness, seeds lose their
productive qualities after a generation, rendering farmers completely
dependent, while inflated prices created debt cycles. With GMO's, an era
of total dependence of agriculture towards agribusiness is set in
motion. In pharmaceuticals, the inflated prices of medication are one of
the key factors of the crisis of the welfare state, while millions of
patients are excluded from appropriate care, especially in the South. A
2001 study of Doctors Without Border showed that only one percent of the
molecules being studies, concerned the most prevalent diseases in the
South (malaria, TBC, etc..) The most well-known case is of course the
controversy around AIDS treatments, where millions of patients are
unnecessarily dying because they are not allowed access to generic
drugs. The software patenting which originated in the U.S. and has been
copied in Europe makes it now possible to protect ideas and any logical
sequence (which includes business processes) and is widely seen as an
impediment for further innovation, since it excludes small companies who
lack the means of taking the licenses, while leading to an explosion of
litigation. American reforms which have allowed universities to
privatize and patent their scientific knowledge and have severely
endangered cooperation amongst scientists. Finally, exploding prices of
scientific publications have rendered access to scientific knowledge
more difficult. At the core of the conflict over IP are also deeply
differing ideological conceptions of cultural creation. IP proponents
see creation in terms of market, with creators investing time and
capital into cultural products destined for the marketplace, and with
the motive and incentive being the profit protected by IP rights;
proponents of the Information Commons have a more social vision of
creation, seeing how every creator is dependent on the community of
creators that preceded and exists alongside of them. IP by restricting
access to the common pool, impedes creation and innovation.

It is this intensive effort at the private appropriation of knowledge
that has created different movements of resistance. The free software
movement, the movements of farmers against biopiracy in seeds and animal
and vegetal types, where Western corporations are privatizing the fruits
of thousands of year of communal cooperation; the movement of patients
and developmental organizations for access to reasonably priced
medicines and medical knowledge; the movement for free access to
scientific publications, are all related reactions to these New
Enclosures. Slowly, ever larger segments of the public started to
realize that the new forms of Intellectual Property were no longer based
on a compromise between the interests of consumers, creators and
publishing intermediaries, but had been extended to favor information
property monopolies, who were also threatening to own and control life
itself.

At the same time as the existing Information and Scientific Commons were
threatened, the internet has created an enormous bottom-up movement,
through peer production and knowledge collectives, through microcontent
and generalized knowledge exchange of millions of people, thereby
creating a new Information Commons. It is the merger of the concerns of
the already existing resistance groups, and the realization of the
meaning of the process of peer to peer content creation, which is at the
core of a new political movement associated with the peer to peer social
formation, inspired by the vision of a re-invigorated Commons. By
extension, this realization has led to connections with those forces
protecting the already existing physical commons (water, air,
transportation systems), and the surviving common property forms in the
South, which are still strong amongst some native peoples. Both type of
movements are similarly concerned with resistance against the extension
of the movement towards private appropriation and the market .

A crucial development to bring all of this to generalized public
consciousness, especially amongst the new generations, was the
development of filesharing. A process that always existed amongst groups
of friends,that of sharing cultural enjoyment and creation, is now
extended in scope by technology. This endangers the intellectual
property system which favors large monopolies, much less the authors and
content creators which are at a disadvantage in the current IP system.
Moreover, the P2P system of music distribution is inherently more
productive and versatile, and more pleasing to the listener of music
than the older system of physically distributing CD’s. It is around this
development that the regressive nature of cognitive capitalism has been
most glaring since it has led to an all-out war against its own
consumers.

Indeed, instead of building a common pool for the world’s music, and
finding an adequate funding mechanism for the artists , the industry is
intent to destroy this more productive system, and wants to criminalize
sharing by punishing the users, and even by attempting to render the
technology illegal or restricting the free usage of digital technologies
through digital rights management schemes . This would have the effect
of not stopping so-called illicit usage, but of stopping the general
movement of sharing of cultural content, even the autonomously created
one. Another strategy is to incorporate control mechanisms either in
software (where it can be hacked and circumvented, but that is made
illegal as well), or in the hardware (digital rights management
schemes). While the users and producers of free culture are battling the
attempts at the enclosure of culture by large 'vectoralist' corporations
, many are working at offering solutions that both protect the use of
culture, and make it possible for creators to make a living .

Also the forces arrayed start from diametrically opposed paradigms. For
the entertainment industry, IP is essential to promote creativity, even
though the current system is a ‘winner-take-all’ system that serves only
a tiny minority of superstar artists. For them, without IP protection,
there would be no creativity. But as P2P processes demonstrate, which
are extraordinarily innovative outside the profit system, creativity is
what people do when they can freely cooperate and share, and hence IP is
sometimes seen as an impediment, impeding the free use what should be a
common resource. But what the Commons movement aims at is not abolishing
IP, but restoring it to its original intention, i.e. a social compromise
that combines the interests of user communities, creators of content
needing to make a living, and the reasonable retribution of
intermediaries which serve in production and distribution. It seeks to
undo the landgrab that has taken place in the last thirty years, and to
remedy the grave social problems that have been created (such as the
lack of access to life-saving medications) by this one-sided
appropriation. It seeks to avoid that new steps are taken in that
process of appropriation, refusing that life can be controlled by
private interests, and that cultural life would be the subject of
restrictive licensing and built into the technology itself. Lastly, it
aims to create the conditions that foster the healthy development of a
strong Commons.

In the meantime, while this political struggle continues, the forces
using peer to peer are devising their own solutions. It started with a
legal infrastructure for the free software movement, the General Public
License, which prohibits the private appropriation of such software. It
continued with the very important Creative Commons initiative initiated
by Lawrence Lessig, who also supported the creation of a Free Culture
advocacy movement. And it also expressed in the continuous technological
development of an infrastructure for cooperation and sharing.

Retrieved from
"[?title=4.1.F.\_New\_lines\_of\_contention:\_Information\_Commons\_vs.\_New\_Enclosures&oldid=9300][]"

-   This page was last modified on 17 November 2006, at 09:36.
-   This page has been accessed 1,565 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /4.1.F._New_lines_of_contention:_Information_Commons_vs._New_Enclosures
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:4.1.F._New_lines_of_contention:_Information_Commons_vs._New_Enclosures&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /4.1.F._New_lines_of_contention:_Information_Commons_vs._New_Enclosures
  [View source]: ?title=4.1.F._New_lines_of_contention:_Information_Commons_vs._New_Enclosures&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=4.1.F._New_lines_of_contention:_Information_Commons_vs._New_Enclosures&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=4.1.F.+New+lines+of+contention%3A+Information+Commons+vs.+New+Enclosures
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/4.1.F._New_lines_of_contention:_Information_Commons_vs._New_Enclosures
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/4.1.F._New_lines_of_contention:_Information_Commons_vs._New_Enclosures
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=4.1.F._New_lines_of_contention:_Information_Commons_vs._New_Enclosures&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=4.1.F._New_lines_of_contention:_Information_Commons_vs._New_Enclosures&oldid=9300
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=4.1.F.\_New\_lines\_of\_contention:\_Information\_Commons\_vs.\_New\_Enclosures&oldid=9300]:
    ?title=4.1.F._New_lines_of_contention:_Information_Commons_vs._New_Enclosures&oldid=9300
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
