[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

4.1.C. Peer Governance as a third mode of governance
====================================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**4.1.C. Peer Governance as a third mode of governance**

In 3.4.A, we have used the typology of intersubjective relations by Alan
Page Fiske. Two points are important here: First, no society or
civilization can survive through reliance on any one mode, they have
always co-existed. But we can also see that the different modes of
civilization are dominated by one particular mode, and this particular
mode will put its mark on all others, molding them on its own image. For
example, the tribal mode of organization, the gift economy, was based on
reciprocity, i.e. Equality Matching. The agrarian mode was mostly based
on Authority Ranking, and capitalism is of course the society where
Market Pricing becomes dominant. If there is to be a Peer to Peer Era,
our hypothesis is that it will be dominated by Communal Shareholding,
i.e. the institutional form of the Commons will be what is central. That
the dominant form recasts the other forms to its image can be seen for
example in how the common property of the Church was embedded in the
hierarchical structure of the Church institution. And in capitalist
society in how the hierarchical state apparatus is subsumed by the
defense of private interests.

We can therefore expect that peer to peer will mold not only autonomous
peer production, but also the market and the state. We therefore want to
distinguish pure modes of peer governance, from the adaptation of
existing governance models to the peer to peer mode.

Following Bob Jessop, we will define peer governance as follows:

"[Peer] Governance is defined as the reflexive self-organisation of
independent actors involved in complex relations of reciprocal
interdependence, with such self-organisation being based on continuing
dialogue and resource-sharing to develop mutually beneficial joint
projects and to manage the contradictions and dilemmas inevitably
involved in such situations. Governance organised on this basis need not
entail a complete symmetry in power relations or complete equality in
the distribution of benefits: indeed, it is highly unlikely to do so
almost regardless of the object of governance or the ‘stakeholders’ who
actually participate in the governance process. All that is involved in
this preliminary definition is the commitment on the part of those
involved to reflexive self-organisation in the face of complex
reciprocal interdependence."

The first aspect is to be found in the increasing amount of peer
governance of autonomous groups. Peer production is not just an economic
process, it is a political process, as these projects have to be
managed, albeit in a distributed way. The principle of self-regulation
of peer groups, which by definition create new use value for the
commons, should of course not be confused with the self-regulation by
the market, where individual agents are only looking out for their own
interests, and not for the public good, which is of course not to say
that it should be rejected in all cases. Bob Jessop insists on the
difference of self-reflexivity amongst participants in peer groups,
something absent in the ‘invisible hand’ of the market. Nevertheless,
even for P2P groups we can envisage a role of arbitrage by the state, to
make sure that P2P groups do not damage the public interests, however
defined. There is still a legitimate difference to be made between peer
governance as dealing with a subset of interests, and the state as
guarantor of the ‘general interest’ of society as a whole .

One of the strengths of the liberal tradition today is that it speaks to
the desire for autonomy of democratic subjects, who in many cases, feel
this autonomy is more threatened by the bureaucracy of the state, than
by the behavior of for-profit companies. Finding alternatives for
bureaucratization is therefore an important part of the evolution
towards P2P models.

Peer governance als has a second more expanded definition and
application, as a mode of governance that can be applied in the real
world, as a true alternative to the top-down and hierarchical state form
of government, and can be applied whenever there are interdependent and
multiple stakeholders involved. He has outlined a consensus among
scholars that four conditions are required to make it applicable
successfully:

“Studies suggest that there are four conditions for effective reflexive
self-organisation: (a) simplifying models and practices, which reduce
the complexity of the world but are still congruent with real world
processes and relevant to actors' objectives; (b) developing the
capacity for dynamic, interactive social learning among autonomous but
interdependent agencies about causal processes and forms of
interdependence, attributions of responsibility and capacity for
actions, and possibilities of co-ordination in a complex, turbulent
environment; (c) building methods for co-ordinating actions across
social forces with different identities, interests, and meaning systems,
over different spatio-temporal horizons, and over different domains of
action; and (d) establishing a common world view for individual action
and a system of ‘metagovernance’ to stabilise key players' orientations,
expectations, and rules of conduct."

How then will the state be molded by peer to peer? Peer governance is
characterized by the relational paradigm . Rather than seeing itself as
sovereign master, the state must be seen as embedded in relationships,
and as in need of respecting these multiple relationships. This is
probably best translated by the concept of multistakeholdership. We can
probably expect that the nation-state, along with the newly emerging
sub- and supraregional structures will continue to exist, but that their
policies will be set through a dialogue with stakeholders. The key will
be to disembed the state from its primary reliance of the private
sector, and to make it beholden to civil society, i.e. the commons, so
that it can act as a center of arbitrage. Despite the recent greater
subsumption of the state to private interests (in the neoliberal era) –
which of course has never been total since the balance of forces is not
based on a complete defeat of the citizenship -- many supraregional
institutes, and in particular non-state governance institutions such as
the standards bodies, but also policy-making at the U.N., already
exhibit many features of multistakeholdership.

What we describe is of course an ideal state of affairs, requiring a new
balance of power in society. Failing such a change, in the asymmetrical
world of power relationship that we live in today, any
multistakeholdership relation will be marked by such unbalances, and
fail to reach the ideal of self-reflexivity in the context of
equipotential relations. What can be achieved in peer groups today,
cannot be achieved by extending the model to the whole of society. In
the text that we are citing, Bob Jessop examines in detail the potential
failure points of the interplay between peer governance and the state.

The market will also be greatly influenced (and of course already is),
and will change more radically in a P2P-dominated political economy. It
is a legitimate expectation, or hope, that the recent evolution from a
market economy to a market society, in which every social relationship
is in the process of being monetized, could partially or even largely be
undone as civil society re-asserts itself. New types of businesses will
emerge that embed more clearly P2P principles. It is to be expected that
in many areas the authoritarian structures and practices will have to
adapt, as the age of participation will want to extend the principle of
self-rule to the productive sphere. As the concept of
multistakeholdersship will be more strongly asserted, corporate
governance will no longer be able to ignore its workers, consumers, and
associated communities, including the voices of the natural environment.
The increased demands for transparency, and their enablement by
technology, will also impose changes in corporate behavior and
structures. There are of course many aspects to this question, such as
whether an alternative to the current capitalist system is possible or
even desirable, but this will be discussed elsewhere.

But peer governance remains a clear alternative. If market allocation
and corporate hierarchy are the governance model of the market,
associated with private property; and if bureaucracy is associated with
the state model of governance, then peer governance is clearly the
alternative being forged by civil society. It will emerge in its pure
form in P2P groups, but its associated values such as relationality (and
transparency) will clearly force an adaptation of both market and the
state. This is why we will say elsewhere in the text that one of the key
goals of a P2P movement will be, or should be, 'For a Commons-based
Society with a reformed market and state'.

The assertion of peer governance as an alternative model, either in the
current situation and/or in any future commons-based society, i.e. a
society that will still inevitably be marked by a pluralism of
governance models consisting of peer governance/ market allocation / and
what Jessop calls ‘imperative coordination’, with doses of
reciprocity-based gift economies thrown in, creates a problem of
‘meta-governance’, which has also already been discussed by Bob Jessop.

He distinguishes the following levels, which we reproduce in full in the
endnotes . What is important is to distinguish meta-heterarchy, i.e. the
coordination of different levels of peer governance, from
meta-governance as the coordination of the different forms of
governance/government.

- Meta-exchange as “the reflexive redesign of individual markets", i.e.
how can different types of markets and scales of market be co-ordinated?

- Meta-organisation, as “the reflexive redesign of organisations, the
creation of intermediating organisations, the reordering of
inter-organisational relations, and the management of organisational
ecologies". We could generalize that also to the problematic of
meta-hierarchy, how the different levels of local, state, supreregional
and global state forms interrelate.

- Meta-heterarchy, “this involves the organisation of the conditions of
self-organisation by redefining the framework for heterarchy or
reflexive self-organisation."

- Meta-governance, “This involves re-articulating and ‘collibrating’ the
different modes of governance… , [i.e.] the judicious mixing of market,
hierarchy, and networks to achieve the best possible outcomes from the
viewpoint of those engaged in metagovernance."

The respective influence of peer governance on market and state is
summarized by Jessop in the following way, and echoes what we have said
about it supra:

“On the one hand, market competition will be balanced by co-operation,
the invisible hand will be combined with a visible handshake. On the
other hand, the state is no longer the sovereign authority. It becomes
just one participant among others in the pluralistic guidance system and
contributes its own distinctive resources to the negotiation process. As
the range of networks, partnerships, and other models of economic and
political governance expand, official apparatuses remain at best first
among equals.The state's involvement would become less hierarchical,
less centralised, and less directive in character. The exchange of
information and moral suasion become key sources of legitimation and the
state's influence depends as much on its role as a prime source and
mediator of collective intelligence as on its command over economic
resources or legitimate coercion ."

Retrieved from
"[?title=4.1.C.\_Peer\_Governance\_as\_a\_third\_mode\_of\_governance&oldid=51395][]"

[Categories][]:

-   [Governance][]
-   [Peergovernance][]
-   [P2P State Approaches][]

-   This page was last modified on 19 July 2011, at 11:56.
-   This page has been accessed 2,349 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /4.1.C._Peer_Governance_as_a_third_mode_of_governance
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:4.1.C._Peer_Governance_as_a_third_mode_of_governance&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /4.1.C._Peer_Governance_as_a_third_mode_of_governance
  [View source]: ?title=4.1.C._Peer_Governance_as_a_third_mode_of_governance&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=4.1.C._Peer_Governance_as_a_third_mode_of_governance&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=4.1.C.+Peer+Governance+as+a+third+mode+of+governance
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/4.1.C._Peer_Governance_as_a_third_mode_of_governance
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/4.1.C._Peer_Governance_as_a_third_mode_of_governance
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=4.1.C._Peer_Governance_as_a_third_mode_of_governance&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=4.1.C._Peer_Governance_as_a_third_mode_of_governance&oldid=51395
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=4.1.C.\_Peer\_Governance\_as\_a\_third\_mode\_of\_governance&oldid=51395]:
    ?title=4.1.C._Peer_Governance_as_a_third_mode_of_governance&oldid=51395
  [Categories]: /Special:Categories "Special:Categories"
  [Governance]: /Category:Governance "Category:Governance"
  [Peergovernance]: /Category:Peergovernance "Category:Peergovernance"
  [P2P State Approaches]: /Category:P2P_State_Approaches
    "Category:P2P State Approaches"
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
