[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

4.2.B. Equality, Hierarchy, Freedom
===================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**4.2.B. Equality, Hierarchy, Freedom**

How do P2P processes integrate ‘values’ and ‘social relation’-typologies
such as equality, hierarchy, and freedom?

Cornelis Castoriadis gives an interpretation of Aristoteles on this
issue: equality is actually present in all types of society, but it is
always ‘according to a criteria’. (this is so because a society is
implicitly a form of exchange, and thus in need of comparative standards
for such exchange). It is over the criteria of exchange that social and
political forces are fighting. Is power to be distributed according to
the merit accorded to birth, according to military exploits, according
to commercial savvy shown in economic life, to intelligence? This
distribution then inherently creates a conflict with the egalitarian
demands that is equally constitutive of politics and society. The
distribution itself creates an exclusion and resulting demands of
participation .

In the modern sense, equality is defined mostly as an equal right to
participation in the political process, and as an ‘equality of
opportunity’, based on merit, in the economic sphere.

Similarly, hierarchy was based in premodern societies based on
‘authority ranking’ which depended on fixed social roles, and on the
competition within these narrowly defined spheres (warriors competing
amongst themselves, Brahmins competing through their knowledge of sacred
scripture). The command and control hierarchy is fixed amongst the
levels, somewhat flexible within the levels. In modern society,
theoretically, hierarchy in power is derived from electoral choice in
case of political power, through economic success in case of economic
power. In theory, it is extremely flexible, based on ‘merit’, but in
practice various processes of monopolization prohibit the full flowering
of such meritocracy.

World-systems theorist Immanuel Walllerstein defines three important
political traditions according to their position regarding
equality/hierarchy. Conservatives want to conserve existing hierarchical
relations, as they were at a certain point in time; liberals are in
favor of a selective meritocracy and stress the formalized and
institutionalized selection criteria; democrats are in favor of maximum
inclusion, without formal testing. Thus, in the early modern system,
conservatives were against elections, liberals were for selective
census-based elections, democrats for general suffrage.

How does peer to peer fit in this scheme? P2P is a democratic process of
full inclusion based on the idea of equipotency. It believes that
expertise cannot be located beforehand, and thus general and open
participation is the rule. But selection immediately sets in as well,
since the equipotency is immediately verified by the work on the
project. Thus there is a selection before the project, and a hierarchy
of networks is created, where everyone finds his place according to
demonstrated potential. Within the project, a hierarchy is also
immediately created depending on expertise, engagement, and the capacity
to generate trust. But in both cases the hierarchies are fluid, not
fixed, and always depend on concrete context, the precise task at hand.
It’s the model of the improvising jazz band, where everyone can in turn
be the solo-ist or the trendsetter. Reputation is generated, but
constantly on the move. Peer to peer is not anti-hierarchy or even
anti-authority, but it is against fixed hierarchies and
‘authoritarianism’, the latter defined as the tendency to monopolize
power, with a will to perpetuate itself and deprive others of resources
that it wants for itself. P2P is for equality of participation, for a
natural and flexible hierarchy based on real merit and communal
consensus. That P2P recognizes differences in potential, and thus
natural hierarchy, does not preclude it from treating participating
partners as equal persons. In fact research from within the synergistic
tradition, which studies the practicalities of cooperation, has verified
a remarkable fact. In free and synergistic cooperation, those groups
function best, which treats its members ‘as if’ they were equals.
Therefore, the recognized hierarchy in reputation, talent, engagement,
etc.. does not preclude, but if requires an egalitarian environment to
blossom.

Some authors, like David Ronfeldt and John Arquila of the Rand
Corporation, claim we are moving to a ‘cyberocracy’, where power is
determined by the access to the networks. While there is indeed a
digital divide that can exclude participation, it is important to stress
the flexibility inherent in P2P networks, which undermines the idea of
‘fixed and monopolistic cyberocracies’. Another author, Alexander Bard
in Netocracy, argues that capitalism is already dead, and that we are
already rules by a hierarchy of knowledge-based networks. At this stage,
these are not very convincing arguments, but there is one scenario in
which they can become possible. It has been described by Jeremy Rifkin
in ‘The Age of Access’. But this scenario of ‘information feudalism’ is
predicated on the destruction of P2P networks. Cognitive capitalism in
indeed in the process of trying to increase its monopolistic rents on
patented digital materials, a strategy which is undermined by the
filesharing and information sharing on the P2P networks. If the industry
succeeds in its civil war against its consumers, by integrating Digital
Rights Management hardware in our very computers, and outlaws sharing
through legal attacks and imprisonment, then such a scenario is
possible. At that time we would have only private networks for which a
license has to be paid, with heavily restrictive usage rules, and no
ownership whatsoever for the consumer. This is indeed a scenario of
exclusion for all those who will not be able to afford access to the
networks. Just as in the feudal structure, where 'serf'-farmers did not
own the land they were working on, we will not own any immaterial
product anymore, we'll just have severely restricted usage rights, and
certainly not the right to share. But we are far from that situation
still, and personally, I do not think it is a likely scenario.

At this moment, P2P is ‘winning’ because its solutions are inherently
more productive and democratic, and it is hard to see any social force,
be it the large corporations, permanently sabotaging the very
technological developments that it needs to survive. More likely,
barring a scenario of a collapse of civilization and a return to
barbarity, it is more likely to see a social system evolve that
incorporates this new level of complexity and participation.

One element I have yet to mention is the freedom aspect, which seems
obvious. P2P is predicated on the maximum freedom. The freedom to join
and participate, to fully express oneself and one’s potential, the
freedom to change course at any point in time, the freedom to quit.
Within the common projects, freedom is constrained through communal
validation and consensus (i.e. the freedom of others). But individuals
can always leave, fork to a new project, create their own. The challenge
is to find affinities, to create a common sphere with at least a few
others and to create effective use value. Unlike in representative
democracy, it is not a model based on a majority imposing its will on a
minority.

Despite the fact that Peer to Peer reverses a number of value
hierarchies introduced by the Enlightenment, in particular the
epistemologies and ontologies of modernity, it is a continuation and
partial realization of the emancipatory project. It is in the definition
of Wallerstein, an eminently democratic project. Peer to peer partly
reflects postmodernity, and partly transcends it.

Retrieved from
"[?title=4.2.B.\_Equality,\_Hierarchy,\_Freedom&oldid=1818][]"

-   This page was last modified on 18 November 2005, at 10:39.
-   This page has been accessed 1,406 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /4.2.B._Equality,_Hierarchy,_Freedom
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:4.2.B._Equality,_Hierarchy,_Freedom&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /4.2.B._Equality,_Hierarchy,_Freedom
  [View source]: ?title=4.2.B._Equality,_Hierarchy,_Freedom&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=4.2.B._Equality,_Hierarchy,_Freedom&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=4.2.B.+Equality%2C+Hierarchy%2C+Freedom
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/4.2.B._Equality,_Hierarchy,_Freedom
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/4.2.B._Equality,_Hierarchy,_Freedom
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=4.2.B._Equality,_Hierarchy,_Freedom&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=4.2.B._Equality,_Hierarchy,_Freedom&oldid=1818
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=4.2.B.\_Equality,\_Hierarchy,\_Freedom&oldid=1818]: ?title=4.2.B._Equality,_Hierarchy,_Freedom&oldid=1818
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
