[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

4.3. Evolutionary Conceptions of Power and Hierarchy
====================================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**4.3. Evolutionary Conceptions of Power and Hierarchy**

Japanese scholar Shumpei Kumon has given the following evolutionary
account of power. In premodernity, he says, power is derived from
military force. The strong conquer the weak and exact tribute, part of
the produce of the land, labor (the corvee system). Rome was rich
because it was strong. In modernity, military force eventually looses
its primary place and monetary power takes over. Or in other words, the
U.S. is strong because it is rich. It's productive capacity is more
important than its military might, the latter derives from the former.
It is commercial and financial power that are the main criterion of
strength and success. In late modernity, a new form of power is born,
through the power of the mass media. The U.S. lost the war, not because
the Vietnamese were stronger militarily, or had more financial clout,
but because the U.S. lost the war for the hearts and minds, and lost
social support for the war effort. With the emergence of the internet
and peer to peer processes, yet a new form of power emerges, and Kumon
calls it the Wisdom Game . In order to have influence, one must give
quality knowledge away, and thus build reputation, through the
demonstration of one’s ‘Wisdom’. The more one shares, the more this
material is used by others, the higher one’s reputation, the bigger
one’s influence. This process is true for individuals within groups, and
for the process among groups, thus creating a hierarchy of influence
amongst networks. But as I have argued, in a true P2P environment, this
process is flexible and reversible to a much larger extent than in the
previous systems.

According to the French philosopher and historian Michel Foucault,
premodern systems, including the early modern classical era of the 18th
century, are characterized by the motto ‘make die or let live’: the
sovereign has the power of life and death, but does not greatly
interfere in the life of his subjects, which is ruled by custom and the
divine precepts of the spiritual power. In modernity, Foucault sees two
new forms of power arising: disciplinary power and biopower.
Disciplinary power starts from the point of view that society consists
of autonomous individuals, which are in need of socialization and
‘discipline’, so that they can be integrated in the normative framework
of capitalist society. Biopower is the start of the total management of
life, from birth to death, of the great mass of the people. The new
motto is therefore, said Foucault: ‘make live, let die’.

His contemporary Gilles Deleuze noted a change though. In mass-media
dominated postmodern society, which became dominant after 1968,
disciplinary institutions enter in crisis. What is used is the
internalization of social requirements through the use of the mass
media, advertising and PR, with control mechanisms in place, which focus
on making sure the right results are attained. The individual is now
himself in charge of making it happen. Power has become more democratic,
more social, more immanent to the social field, "distributed throughout
the brains and bodies of the citizens" (Negri's Empire, p. 23). Philippe
Zafirian, in his essay Temps et Modernite, further re-interprets the
work of Deleuze by applying it to the workplace and calls the new power,
the power of modulation, 'control by modulation' . Instead of tightly
describing and dividing jobs, and controlling their debit, as was the
case in the 'modern' factory system and in particular in the
Fordist/Taylorist period, the focus is now on 'objectives' and
'deadlines'. Both the manager and the work are constantly evaluating and
self-evaluating their ability to conform to the high-pressure objectives
and deadlines, but are 'free' in how to attain it. Zafirian uses the
metaphor of the 'elastic' : you can pull it in different directions,
within it you are free to go about, but there are indeed limits that
cannot be crossed.

In any case, Deleuze already prefigured, so many years ahead, the
emerging dominance of distributed networks (rhizomes). If Foucault was
the philosopher and historian of power of modernity, then Deleuze and
Guattari can be considered to be the early theorizers of power in the
network era. However there is a danger in missing important
developments, radical innovations even, if we conflate the post-1968
under the one heading of postmodernity, since that would miss the
accelerated growth of peer to peer processes, which started only in the
1990's, after the popularization of the internet. Perhaps future
historians will date a new era that began in 1989, with the fall of the
Berlin Wall indicating the moment when the free flow of information
began to destroy the most authoritarian regimes. In the figures below, I
explicitly distinguish the postmodern era, from the emerging peer to
peer era.

The P2P era indeed adds a new twist, a new form of power, which we have
called Protocollary Power, and has first been clearly identified and
analyzed by Alexander Galloway in his book Protocol. We have already
given some examples. One is the fact that the blogosphere has devised
mechanisms to avoid the emergence of individual and collective
monopolies, through rules that are incorporated in the software itself.
Another was whether the entertainment industry would succeed in
incorporating software or hardware-based restrictions to enforce their
version of copyright. There are many other similarly important
evolutions to monitor: Will the internet remain a point to point
structure? Will the web evolve to a true P2P medium through Writeable
Web developments? The common point is this: social values are
incorporated, integrated in the very architecture of our technical
systems, either in the software code or the hardwired machinery, and
these then enable/allow or prohibit/discourage certain usages, thereby
becoming a determinant factor in the type of social relations that are
possible. Are the algorhythms that determine search results objective,
or manipulated for commercial and ideological reasons? Is parental
control software driven by censorship rules that serve a fundamentalist
agenda? Many issues are dependent on hidden protocols, which the user
community has to learn to see (as a new form of media literacy and
democratic practice), so that it can become an object of conscious
development, favoring peer to peer processes, rather than the
restrictive and manipulative command and control systems. In P2P
systems, the formal rules governing bureaucratic systems are replaced by
the design criteria of our new means of production, and this is where we
should focus our attention. Galloway suggests that we make a diagram of
the networks we participate in, with dots and lines, nodes and edges.
Important questions then become: Who decides who can participate?, or
better, what are the implied rules governing participation? (since there
is no specific 'who' or command in a distributed environment); what kind
of linkages are possible? On the example of the internet, Galloway shows
how the net has a peer to peer protocol in the form of TCP/IP, but that
the Domain Name System is hierarchical, and that an authorative server
could block a domain family from operating. This is how power should be
analyzed. Such power is not per se negative, since protocol is needed to
enable participation (no driving without highway code!), but protocol
can also be centralized, proprietary, secret, in that case subverting
peer to peer processes. However, the stress on protocol, which concerns
what Yochai Benkler calls the 'logical layer' of the networks, should
not make us forget the power distribution of the physical layer (who
owns the networks), and the content layer (who owns and controls the
content).

The key question is: do the centralized and hierarchical elements in the
protocol, enable or disable participation? This is shown in the
following account of the development of the theory and practice of
hierarchy, submitted to us by John Heron in a personal communication. In
true peer to peer, the role of hierarchy is to enable the spontaneous
emergence of 'autonomy in cooperation':

"There seem to be at least four degrees of cultural development, rooted
in degrees of moral insight:

​(1) autocratic cultures which define rights in a limited and oppressive
way and there are no rights of political participation;

​(2) narrow democratic cultures which practice political participation
through representation, but have no or very limited participation of
people in decision-making in all other realms, such as research,
religion, education, industry etc.;

​(3) wider democratic cultures which practice both political
participation and varying degree of wider kinds of participation;

​(4) commons p2p cultures in a libertarian and abundance-oriented global
network with equipotential rights of participation of everyone in every
field of human endeavor."

Heron adds that "These four degrees could be stated in terms of the
relations between hierarchy, co-operation and autonomy.

​(1) Hierarchy defines, controls and constrains co-operation and
autonomy;

​(2) Hierarchy empowers a measure of co-operation and autonomy in the
political sphere only;

​(3) Hierarchy empowers a measure of co-operation and autonomy in the
political sphere and in varying degrees in other spheres;

​(4) The sole role of hierarchy is in its spontaneous emergence in the
initiation and continuous flowering of autonomy-in-co-operation in all
spheres of human endeavor

From all of the above, we can conclude that hierarchy does not disappear
in peer to peer processes, but that it changes its nature. Hierarchy, or
authority ranking as it is called by Alan Fiske, takes on new forms such
as peer governance, servant leadership, multistakeholdership.

Here is how Joseph Rost defines leadership in the new collaborative era:

“The first is that the activities be influential, that is, noncoercive.
The second is that the activities be done by people in a relationship.
The third is that the activities involve a real significant change. And
the fourth element is that the activities reflect the purposes of the
people in the relationship, not just a single person. All of these
standards insure collaboration rather than the notion that leadership is
a great leader doing great things ."

Similarly, another author on leadership, Jeffrey S. Nielsen
distinguishes ‘rank thinking’, from ‘peer thinking’:

"I define rank thinking as the belief that only a few in any
organization should be given special privilege to monopolize
information, control decision-making, and command obedience from the
vast majority either through coercive or manipulative power. Peer
thinking, on the other hand, is the belief that everyone in the
organization should have equal standing to share in information,
participate in the decision-making process, and choose to follow through
persuasive means. Peer thinking assumes that we each have equal
privilege to speak and an obligation to listen. Peer-based organizations
create a space--an arena--where we come to recognize and respect one
another as equal participants in organizational life ."

Retrieved from
"[?title=4.3.\_Evolutionary\_Conceptions\_of\_Power\_and\_Hierarchy&oldid=57019][]"

[Categories][]:

-   [P2P Hierarchy Theory][]
-   [P2P Theory][]

-   This page was last modified on 26 December 2011, at 00:13.
-   This page has been accessed 1,661 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /4.3._Evolutionary_Conceptions_of_Power_and_Hierarchy
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:4.3._Evolutionary_Conceptions_of_Power_and_Hierarchy&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /4.3._Evolutionary_Conceptions_of_Power_and_Hierarchy
  [View source]: ?title=4.3._Evolutionary_Conceptions_of_Power_and_Hierarchy&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=4.3._Evolutionary_Conceptions_of_Power_and_Hierarchy&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=4.3.+Evolutionary+Conceptions+of+Power+and+Hierarchy
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/4.3._Evolutionary_Conceptions_of_Power_and_Hierarchy
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/4.3._Evolutionary_Conceptions_of_Power_and_Hierarchy
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=4.3._Evolutionary_Conceptions_of_Power_and_Hierarchy&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=4.3._Evolutionary_Conceptions_of_Power_and_Hierarchy&oldid=57019
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=4.3.\_Evolutionary\_Conceptions\_of\_Power\_and\_Hierarchy&oldid=57019]:
    ?title=4.3._Evolutionary_Conceptions_of_Power_and_Hierarchy&oldid=57019
  [Categories]: /Special:Categories "Special:Categories"
  [P2P Hierarchy Theory]: /Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory
    "Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory"
  [P2P Theory]: /Category:P2P_Theory "Category:P2P Theory"
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
