[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

5.1.B. Equipotentiality vs. the Power Law
=========================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**5.1.B. Equipotentiality vs. the Power Law**

One of the most interesting findings of social network analysis is the
existence of a power law. A power law says that for any x increase in
the number of links per node (or specific characteristic per node, such
as acreage per square kilometer for a river basin), the number of nodes
having that characteristic will decline by a fixed factor. In economics
this gives us the famous Pareto principle, i.e. 20% of the people having
80% of the wealth. Or 20% of the books in a bookstore generating 80% of
the sales or profits. But the power law is nearly everywhere, suggesting
a natural form of concentration and even monopolization as almost
inevitable. In fact, it seems that whenever we have many choices and
many distributed agents making these choices, inequality of choice is
created . It seems to be the natural result of any 'economy of
attention'. But that is the point, such distribution is not forced, as
in a oligopoly or monopoly, but arises naturally from the freedom of
choice, and can be considered a 'fair' result, provided no coercion is
used. Networks where such a power law operates are called 'scale-free',
because at whatever scale, the same relation between variables (i.e.
distribution pattern) applies.

In terms of a normative P2P ethos, it is important to note that it
should not necessarily and systematically favor egalitarian networks.
The Internet and the web are both aristocratic networks; the blogosphere
is characterized by a power law distribution. The key questions are: 1)
is the network efficient; 2) does it enable participation; 3) is the
emergence of an aristocratic structure non-coercive and eventually
reversible. Focusing on this reversibility is probably one of the tasks
of peer governance. Granted that a power law may be in operation, that
does not mean we must acquiesce in social processes that re-inforce such
inequalities, but rather, that we then look for human and
technical/algorhythmic solutions that renders the structure fluid enough
so that it may be reversed if need be. But in many cases, we have to
admit that some form of centralization, is necessary and efficient. We
all prefer one standard for our operating systems for example.

The power law can possibly mitigated by the development of algorhythms,
that can highlight important information and connections from nodes that
may not come up 'naturally', but this discipline, though still in its
infancy at the moment, is making rapid strides and is the core
competence of new internet companies like Google, Technorati and others.
But the power law is also counteracted by what some network economists
have called the 'Long Tail'. This is the phenomena whereby minority
groups are not excluded from the distribution of knowledge and exchange,
and markets, but are on the contrary enable to organize
micro-communities. In the market for cultural products, this has the
effect of radically enhancing the supply and demand for products.
Instead of the 80/20 distribution of products, i.e. 20% of the products
being responsible for 80% of the sales and profits, we get something
more akin to a 50/50 distribution. Online stores like Amazon and eBay
are instrumentalising the phenomenon by using affinity matching schemes,
which have resulted in the creation of many thousands of previously not
existing mini-markets. Books, CD's and films which would be destroyed
for lack of interest in the mass media system, now have a second and
third and perhaps infinitely extendable lease of life, through the
continued attention given to them by self-organizing minority interests,
which can perpetuate across generations. This is an important guarantee
for a vibrant cultural life, which does not destroy difference and
cultural heterogeneity.

One of the keys to avoiding the power law may therefore be to keep
sub-networks small. One of the recurring debates within cooperation
studies indeed concerns a discussion on the optimal size of online
groups. Dunbar, an anthropologist at the University College of London,
has posited a link between brain size and our maximum number of close
social ties , a claim supported by many animal, especially primate, and
anthropological studies. He predicts that 147.8 is the "mean group size"
for humans and this number has also been applied to online cooperation.
But such a number would require a large time of social grooming so in
reality it is much less. This discussion is important because other
researchers, such as Valerie Krebs, have shown that in smaller groups,
the power law does not operate and that they function as egalitarian
networks . The key therefore is to organize online collaboration in such
a way so that it is divided in appropriate subgroups, and this seems
pretty much the way software peer production teams seem to operate.

There will be a lot to learn from this emergent field of cooperation
studies , as it weanes us from wishful thinking into a more systematic
understanding of what it takes to make cooperative projects work.

One of the most important works have been those of Axelrod, in his
Evolution of Cooperation (Axelrod, 1984). He reconceived Game Theory,
which had originally been seen as undermining altruism, by grounding the
experiments in the real conditions of social life, instead of
abstracting it in unrealistic laboratory or thought experiments. Game
theory is important because it models human intentionality as it wavers
between altruistic and selfish strategies. His study of the classic
Prisoner's Dilemma has yielded three important rules for cooperation to
occur : 1) communities must promote ongoing interaction; 2) individuals
must be able to identify each other; 3) individuals must have
information about the past behaviour of others. Many of these insights
have been incorporated in the social software tools being developed, and
are the reason of the success of reputation systems such as exists in
eBay etc… According to the findings of Howard Rheingold and his
cooperation studies group, the Prisoner's Dilemma game, which undermines
cooperation and operates in an information-poor environment, may well be
superseded by new forms of the Assurance Game . A Prisoner's Game will
operate when no information about the partner is available, as distrust
will prevail, but the social accounting technologies generate
information about the trustworthy of a potential partner, and in such an
environment, the Assurance Game will prevail.

Another important milestone in cooperation studies did not focus on
interperson interaction (as does Game Theory) but on group behaviour in
real physical communities involved in the use and management of communal
resources. It can be found in Eleanor Ostrom's Governing the Commons
(Ostrom, 1990). Amongst the principles applied in successful communities
are: 1) boundaries must be clearly defined so that there is a clear
sense of who may use collective resources; 2) the rules of usage must
match local conditions; 3) affected individuals must be able to
participate in the adaptation of these rules; 4) control mechanisms of
user behaviour must exist, as well as a system of graduated sanctions.
Her survey concluded that this was done better through self-regulation
than through external authorities; 5) finally, the community must have
access to low-cost conflict resolution mechanisms.

It must be stressed however that her study about physical Commons
dealing with scarce rival goods, cannot be applied without adaptation to
the digital commons dealing witn non-rival goods, where a Tragedy of the
Commons, i.e. an abuse of these scarce goods for personal gain, cannot
occur, though some of her conclusions on group behaviour and its
regulation do apply. But the totality of her conclusions are certainly
of interest to defenders of our very important physical Commons and show
that well regulated Commons have found ways to deal with abuse and
overuse.

The shift in 'business models' characteristics of the new networks is
explained by David Reed, who has summarized the different mathematical
laws inherent in the value created by networks. First, we focus on the
individuals. If a network has N-members and memberships grows, then one
can see a linear growth in audience, i.e. N+1, N+2, etc.. i.e. a
proportional growth in value. This formula was already at play in
broadcast media and in such an environment, 'content is king', and
publishers vie for the attention of the users of the network. This
explains the role of portal sites such as Yahoo, who re-intermediate the
economy of attention that we discussed before. If we now focus on the
'interaction between individuals', we see that the network enables
transactions, but that these grow by a 'square value'. This
characteristic is called Metcalfe's Law. A network of 2 allows for 2
transactions (back and forth buying and selling), a network of 3 allows
for 8 transactions, a network of 4 allows for 16 transactions. This
aspect of the network creates transactional platforms such as eBay.
Finally, we focus on community. Networks have the ability to enable the
formation of subgroups, they are 'Group Forming Networks'. But value
growth here is 'exponential'. It is this characteristic that is called
Reed's Law . Every affinity group creates and 'consumes' its own
content, and it is here that the true peer to peer processes emerge,
characterized by infinite content creation . The economy of attention
becomes moot, because what is happening is not limited content competing
for the same audience, but infinite content competing for infinite
combinations of affinity groups. You are then creating content, not for
an audience, but as a means of creating interconnectedness between a
group of people sharing an interest or common goal.

To conclude: the discovery of the theory of networks in the physical
sphere, has therefore a corollary in seeing it in social life, and in
particular, in the area of organizational life, including business. The
finds its expression in the emerging discipline of social network
analysis and cooperation studies generally, and also the business
process applied "coordination theory", as pioneered by Thomas Malone .
All these studies are important because they act as a corrective to
misplaced idealism and provide lessons from scientific studies and
objective experience with true cooperation.

Retrieved from
"[?title=5.1.B.\_Equipotentiality\_vs.\_the\_Power\_Law&oldid=57020][]"

[Categories][]:

-   [P2P Hierarchy Theory][]
-   [P2P Theory][]

-   This page was last modified on 26 December 2011, at 00:14.
-   This page has been accessed 1,356 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /5.1.B._Equipotentiality_vs._the_Power_Law
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:5.1.B._Equipotentiality_vs._the_Power_Law&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /5.1.B._Equipotentiality_vs._the_Power_Law
  [View source]: ?title=5.1.B._Equipotentiality_vs._the_Power_Law&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=5.1.B._Equipotentiality_vs._the_Power_Law&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=5.1.B.+Equipotentiality+vs.+the+Power+Law
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/5.1.B._Equipotentiality_vs._the_Power_Law
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/5.1.B._Equipotentiality_vs._the_Power_Law
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=5.1.B._Equipotentiality_vs._the_Power_Law&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=5.1.B._Equipotentiality_vs._the_Power_Law&oldid=57020
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=5.1.B.\_Equipotentiality\_vs.\_the\_Power\_Law&oldid=57020]: ?title=5.1.B._Equipotentiality_vs._the_Power_Law&oldid=57020
  [Categories]: /Special:Categories "Special:Categories"
  [P2P Hierarchy Theory]: /Category:P2P_Hierarchy_Theory
    "Category:P2P Hierarchy Theory"
  [P2P Theory]: /Category:P2P_Theory "Category:P2P Theory"
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
