[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

6.1.C. Participative Spirituality and the Critique of Spiritual Authoritarianism
================================================================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**6.1.C. Participative Spirituality and the Critique of Spiritual
Authoritarianism**

Traditional mystical and religious paths are exclusionary, based on
strong divisions between the in and the out group. Internally, they
reflect the social values and organizational models of the civilizations
in which they were born. Thus they are premodern in authoritarian
manner, patriarchal, sexist, subsuming the individual to the whole. Or,
in their latter manifestations they are run as corporations and
bureaucracies, reflecting the early emergence of capitalism as in the
case of Protestantism, and in the case of the “new age", operating
explicitly as a spiritual marketplace reflecting the capitalist monetary
ethos, where every spiritual experience can be bought, for the price of
attending a workshop or a seminar. When traditional religions of the
East move to the West, they bring with them their authoritarian and
feudal formats and mentalities. Epistemologically, in their spiritual
methodologies, they are authoritarian as well, far from an open process,
traditional paths start from the idea that there is one world, one
truth, one divine order, and that some privileged individuals, saints,
bishops, sages, gurus, have been privileged to know this truth, and that
this can be taught to followers. The seventies and eighties have been
characterized by the emergence of new religions and cults with a
particularly authoritarian character, and by the appearance of a number
of fallen gurus , characterized by abuses in terms of finance,
sexuality, and power. If one decides to follow an experiential path, it
is always the case that the experience is only validated if it follows
the pregiven doctrine of the group in question.

It is clear that such a situation, such a spiritual offering is
antithetical to the P2P ethos. Thus, in the emergence of a new
participatory spirituality, two moments can be recognized, a critical
one, focused on the critique of spiritual authoritarianism, and with
books like those of June Campbell, J. Kripal, the Trimondi’s, the
Kramer’s, and many others who have been advocating reform within the
Churches and spiritual movements, and the more constructive approaches
which aim to construct a new approach to spiritual inquiry altogether,
those that explicitly integrate P2P practices in their mode of spiritual
inquiry. The two pioneering authors who discuss ‘participative
spirituality’ are Jorge Ferrer and John Heron.

Heron has given a good summary of the post-WWII evolution of spiritual
culture and describes the current moment as follows:

\
 - (a) The erosion of guru status as a result of sexual and financial
abuse and bullying scandals among both Eastern and homegrown Western
gurus and spiritual teachers.

- (b) The erosion of 'enlightenment' claims by the proliferation of the
number of people, especially in the West, making the claim: the more
people who make the claim, the more its narcissistic inflation stands
revealed. For the 'enlightenment' claim is also an authority-claim to
have followers, a recruiting drive; and the more claims that are made,
the stronger the competition among claimants in the market-place for
attention.

- (c) A growing awareness that spiritual authority is within and that to
project it outward onto teacher, tradition or text is an early,
adolescent phase of spiritual development in the one projecting, and
counter-spiritual manipulative abuse in any guru/teacher who seeks to
elicit, to appropriate and to sustain the projection.

- (d) The emergence of peer to peer spirituality, which democratizes
charismatic, enlightened leadership, and realizes that it is a role
which different persons assume at different times, either in the
initiation of a peer group or in the continuous unfolding of its
process.

Ferrer’s book, Revisioning Transpersonal Psychology: Towards a
Participatory Vision of Human Spirituality, not only is a strong
critique of spiritual authoritarianism, which integrates
poststructuralist arguments against absolute knowledge claims, but also
a first description of an alternative view . In it, a spiritual practice
operates as an open process in which spiritual knowledge is co-created,
and thus cannot fully rely on old ‘maps’, which have to be considered as
testimonies of earlier creations, not as absolute truths. Spirituality
is understood in terms of the present relationship with the Cosmos (the
concrete Totality), accessible to everyone here and now . Instead of the
perennialist vision of many paths leading to the same truth, Ferrer
advocates for an ‘ocean of emancipation’ with the many moving shores
representing the different and ever-evolving approaches to spiritual
co-creation. In an article on ‘Integral Transformative Practices’ ,
Ferrer also records new practices that reflect this participatory turn,
such as the ones pioneered by Albareda and Romero in Spain: open
processes of self- and group discovery that are no longer cognicentric,
but instead fully integral approaches that collaborative engage the
instinctual, emotional, mental, and transmental domains as equal
partners in the unfolding of spiritual life. J. Kripal, who is very
appreciative of Jorge Ferrer's contribution, does conclude that one more
lingering illusion about religion and mysticism should be abandoned:
that it is somehow quintessentially 'moral' or 'ethical' and essentially
emancipatory in character, a claim that he disputes .

New Zealand-based John Heron expounds, in the book “Sacred Science", the
specific peer to peer practice that he has created, called Cooperative
Inquiry. In such a process, individuals agree on a methodology of
inquiry, then compare their experiences, adapting their inquiry to their
findings, etc… thus creating a collective intelligence, which is totally
open and periodically renewed, experimenting both with the
‘transcendent’ practices of eastern nondual religions (transmental
‘witnessing’) as well as with the immanent grounding methods of the
nature religions, thus creating a innovative dipolar approach which does
not reject any practice, but attempts to integrate them. Peer circles
(check the concept in a web search engine) have sprung up worldwide.
Remi Sussan stresses that the chaos magick groups on the internet,
explicitly see themselves as self-created religions adopting open
peer-based processes.

John Heron, in a personal communication, has outlined which conditions a
contemporary spiritual practice based on interdependent relationality,
should uphold, with explicite P2P characteristics:

On this overall view, spirituality is located in the interpersonal heart
of the human condition where people co-operate to explore meaning, build
relationship and manifest creativity through collaborative action
inquiry into multi-line integration and consummation. Such collegial
applied spirituality has at least eight distinguishing characteristics.

​(1) It is developmentally holistic, involving diverse major lines of
human development; and the holism is both within each line and as
between the lines. Prime value is put on relational lines, such as
gender, psychosexuality, emotional and interpersonal skills,
communicative competence, peer communion, morality, human ecology,
supported by the individualistic, such as contemplative competence,
physical fitness.

​(2) It is psychosomatically holistic, embracing a fully embodied and
vitalized way of being.

​(3) It is epistemologically holistic, embracing many ways of knowing:
knowing by presence with, by intuiting significant form and process, by
conceptualizing, by practising. Such holistic knowing is intrinsically
dialogic, action- and inquiry-oriented. It is fulfilled in peer-to-peer
participative inquiry, and the participation is both epistemic and
political.

​(4) It is ontologically holistic, open to the manifest (nature, culture
and the subtle), to immanent life and transcendent mind. To relate (4)
back to (3), there can be experiential knowing by presence with the
manifest, the immanent and the transcendent, either relatively
independently of each other or in full integration.

​(5) It is focussed on worthwhile practical purposes that promote a
flourishing humanity-cum-ecosystem.

​(6) It embraces peer-to-peer relations and participatory forms of
decision-making. The latter in particular can be seen as a radical
discipline in relational spirituality, burning up a lot of the
privatized ego.

​(7) It honours the gradual emergence and development of peer-to-peer
forms of association and practice.

​(8) It affirms the role of both initiating hierarchy, and spontaneously
surfacing and rotating hierarchy among the peers, in such emergence."

Retrieved from
"[?title=6.1.C.\_Participative\_Spirituality\_and\_the\_Critique\_of\_Spiritual\_Authoritarianism&oldid=20305][]"

-   This page was last modified on 22 April 2008, at 12:15.
-   This page has been accessed 1,430 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /6.1.C._Participative_Spirituality_and_the_Critique_of_Spiritual_Authoritarianism
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:6.1.C._Participative_Spirituality_and_the_Critique_of_Spiritual_Authoritarianism&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /6.1.C._Participative_Spirituality_and_the_Critique_of_Spiritual_Authoritarianism
  [View source]: ?title=6.1.C._Participative_Spirituality_and_the_Critique_of_Spiritual_Authoritarianism&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=6.1.C._Participative_Spirituality_and_the_Critique_of_Spiritual_Authoritarianism&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=6.1.C.+Participative+Spirituality+and+the+Critique+of+Spiritual+Authoritarianism
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/6.1.C._Participative_Spirituality_and_the_Critique_of_Spiritual_Authoritarianism
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/6.1.C._Participative_Spirituality_and_the_Critique_of_Spiritual_Authoritarianism
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=6.1.C._Participative_Spirituality_and_the_Critique_of_Spiritual_Authoritarianism&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=6.1.C._Participative_Spirituality_and_the_Critique_of_Spiritual_Authoritarianism&oldid=20305
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=6.1.C.\_Participative\_Spirituality\_and\_the\_Critique\_of\_Spiritual\_Authoritarianism&oldid=20305]:
    ?title=6.1.C._Participative_Spirituality_and_the_Critique_of_Spiritual_Authoritarianism&oldid=20305
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
