[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

6.1.D. Partnering with nature and the cosmos
============================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**6.1.D. Partnering with nature and the cosmos**

Throughout this essay, I have defined P2P as communal shareholding based
on participation in a common resource (with the twist that in P2P it is
we ourselves who are building that resource, which did not previously
exist, i.e. the common is actually the 'object of our cooperation'),
whereby other partners are considered as equipotent. We also mentioned
the co-existence within P2P groups of both a kind of naturally emerging
and flexible hierarchy that aims to increase participation to a maximum
extent, and egalitarian treatment of the equipotential partners. There
are very good reasons to believe that we can and should extent this
ethos to non-human forces, be they natural or cosmic, and if you have
this kind of faith or experience, with spiritual forces as well. What
follows is a speculative account of the philosophical and spiritual
sources that could be used by our culture to recover such ethos.
Participation emerges here with its central meaning: not that of
atomized and separate individuals cooperating, but the growth of a
consciousness that recognizes our mutual embeddedness and
interdependence. What is emerging is a ‘participative worldview’, but it
is also something we need to reconstruct.

Indeed in a sense, spiritually, the P2P or ‘participative ethos’ harks
back to premodern animistic attitudes , which can also be found in
Chinese Taoism for example. An increasing number of anthropologist, such
as Steven Tambiah, have argued that the magical form of conciousness, is
not just an outdated form practiced by ancestral humans or contemporary
tribal peoples, but that it is a necessary adjunct to causality-inspired
rational consciousness, that both are needed and entwined .

During the annual SEED conferences in Alququerque, New Mexico, Western
astrophysicians, and philosophers are undertaking a continued dialogue
with native American elders, as one way to mutually enrich their
epistemologies, with the explicit aim of recovering participative
approaches . Jean Gebser, in his masterwork 'The Ever-present Origin',
is probably the one that has best described the process of recovery of
such participative worldview, starting with the artists of the beginning
of the 20th century and continuing with the development of quantum
physics, in recent times, calling it 'integral consciousness'.

Instead of considering nature in a Cartesian fashion as ‘dead matter’ or
a collection of objects to be manipulated , we recognize that throughout
nature there is a scale of consciousness or awareness , and that natural
agents and collectives have their natural propensities, and that, giving
up our need for domination (or rather 'transforming it') in the same way
that we are able to practice in P2P processes, we ‘cooperate’, as
partners, with such propensities, acting as midwives rather than
dominators. French sociologists like Michel Maffesioli and Philippe
Zafirian have analyzed a change in our culture, particularly in the new
generations of young people, which go precisely in that direction, and
it is of course specifically reflected in sections of green movement.
Again, this is not a regression to an utopian and lost past, but a
re-enactment of a potential, but this time, with fully differentiated
individuals. While there is undoubtedly a new stress on 'wholism' in
many contemporary thinkers, the stress is on interpretations of
interdependence that do not return to pre-individual interpretations,
but rather on showing on the individual is fully co-dependent on the
whole. In our understanding, this goes much beyond systems theory , as
it has to include the necessary subjective and intersubjective elements,
an approach that we have used as a research methodology for this book,
and which we call integral. (see appendix 1.A).

An important question is: how do we recover such a tradition of thought
and feeling-being, we who are the children of the Enlightenment? Here
are some explorations of 'genealogies of thought' which could be used to
recreate such participative ethos.

One of the possible paths is the recovery of the cosmobiological
tradition of the Renaissance thinkers, who are close to us since they
had one foot in the world of tradition and one in the world of
modernity-inducing change. Loren Goldner uncovers, in a very interesting
essay , this ‘third stream of cosmobiological thought’, which he says
could be used to reconstruct a post-Enlightenment left. He contrasts it
with the Aristotelianism of the Church, and with the ‘mechanistic’ ideas
of the Enlightenment (creators of a dead universe and empty space that
can be gazed at and manipulated by the autonomous ego). He traces the
history of this third stream starts with the Renaissance starting with
Bruno and Kepler, and later continued by Baader, Schelling, Oersted,
Davy, Faraday, Goethe, W.R. Hamilton, Goerg Cantor, Joseph Needham. For
them, the universe is brimming with life, sensuousness, and meaning, and
cannot be approached as dead matter. Marx explicitly refers to this
tradition, and was imbued by it through his filiations with German
'idealist' philosophy, but, according to Goldner, that has been
forgotten by the two dominant streams of the left, i.e. social democracy
and Stalinism, who take over the mechanistic Enlightenment tradition.
Both Foucauldian postmodernism, and the defense of the Enlightenment
tradition by Habermas, miss and obscure this vital link as well, says
Goldner . . In any case, this cosmobiological tradition is an
'alternative strand of modernity', which lost out but could perhaps be
retrieved and redeveloped.

Other important genealogies to recreate a participatory worldview
appropriate to our age have been undertaken by Smolinowsky and David
Skrbna, in their 'ecophilosophy' . The focus here is on the concept of
the 'participatory mind' . David Abram, in his classic ‘The Spell of the
Sensuous’, seeks a source in the phenomenological tradition of western
philosophy as represented by Edmund Husserl and Merleau-Ponty, who
replaced the conventional view of a single, wholly determinable reality
with a fluid picture of the mind/body as a participatory organism that
reciprocally interacts with its surroundings. These different traditions
stress the embodiedness of humans in our bodies and within nature .

Recently there have been important attempts to rephrase the
participatory tradition by John Heron and Jorge Ferrer as well, arising
from within the community of transpersonal psychology. The Nature
Institute, inspired by Goethe and others, has been working on developing
conceptions of qualitative science that fits this evolution as well.
Toni Negri and others, are similarly trying to redeveloped a similar
'alternative modernity' based on the oeuvre of Spinoza, though the
relationship with nature does not seem to be a prominent theme in his
writings. Rather, they focus on developing a participative relationship
with our machines .

In any case, there is a natural progression in scope, from P2P groups,
to the global partnership-based dialogues between religions and
civilizations, to the new partnership with natural and cosmic forces,
that forms a continuum, and that is equally expressive of the deep
changes in ontology and epistemology that P2P represents. I do not think
it is possible to divorce the P2P ethos as it applies to people and
humanity, from our wider relationship with nature, and therefore, it
will be impossible to fully retain either the modernist objective gaze
or postmodern-inspired nihilism. Instead, we have to reconstruct our
worldviews and heal our 'split' with nature.

And at some point, we will start to realize that our very realities are
'always-already participative' , that we are not separate from the
world, that our being-in-the-world is subjective-objective. When this
happens on a more massive scale, a new civilization will in effect have
been born.

Retrieved from
"[?title=6.1.D.\_Partnering\_with\_nature\_and\_the\_cosmos&oldid=20307][]"

-   This page was last modified on 22 April 2008, at 12:16.
-   This page has been accessed 1,487 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /6.1.D._Partnering_with_nature_and_the_cosmos
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:6.1.D._Partnering_with_nature_and_the_cosmos&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /6.1.D._Partnering_with_nature_and_the_cosmos
  [View source]: ?title=6.1.D._Partnering_with_nature_and_the_cosmos&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=6.1.D._Partnering_with_nature_and_the_cosmos&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=6.1.D.+Partnering+with+nature+and+the+cosmos
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/6.1.D._Partnering_with_nature_and_the_cosmos
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/6.1.D._Partnering_with_nature_and_the_cosmos
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=6.1.D._Partnering_with_nature_and_the_cosmos&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=6.1.D._Partnering_with_nature_and_the_cosmos&oldid=20307
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=6.1.D.\_Partnering\_with\_nature\_and\_the\_cosmos&oldid=20307]:
    ?title=6.1.D._Partnering_with_nature_and_the_cosmos&oldid=20307
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
