[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

6. P2P in the Sphere of Culture and Self
========================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**6. P2P in the Sphere of Culture and Self**

**6.1.A. A new articulation between the individual and the collective**

[6.1.B. Towards ‘contributory’ dialogues of civilizations and
religions][]

[6.1.C. Participative Spirituality and the Critique of Spiritual
Authoritarianism][]

[6.1.D. Partnering with nature and the cosmos][]

[6.1.E. The Emergence of Peer Circles][]

\
 **6.1.A. A new articulation between the individual and the collective**

One of the key insights of psychologist Clare Graves’ interpretation of
human cultural evolution, is the idea of the changing balance, over
time, between the two poles of the individual and the collective. In the
popularization of his research by the Spiral Dynamics systems, they see
the tribal era as characterized by collective harmony, but also as a
culture of stagnation. Out of this harmony, strong individuals are born,
heroes and conquerors, which will their people and others into the
creation of larger entities. These leaders are considered divinities
themselves and thus in certain senses are ‘beyond the law’, which they
have themselves constituted through their conquest. It is against this
‘divine individualism’ that a religious reaction is born, very evident
in the monotheistic religions, which stresses the existence of a
transcendent divine order (rather than the immanent order of paganism),
to which even the sovereign must obey. Thus a more communal/collective
order is created. But again, this situation is overturned when a new
individual ethos arises, which will be reflected in the growth of
capitalism. It is based on individuals, and collective individuals,
which think strategically in terms of their own interest. In the words
of anthropologist Louis Dumont, we moved from a situation of wholism, in
which the empirical individuals saw themselves foremost as part of a
whole, towards individualism as an ideology , positing atomistic
individuals, in need of socialization. They transferred their powers to
collective individuals, such as the king, the people, the nation, which
could act in their name, and created a sacrificial unity through the
institutions of modernity. (In section 3.3.C. , I have tried to show how
peer to peer tries to avoid the creation of collective individuals,
through the creation of objective algorhythms which express the communal
wisdom of a collective.)

This articulation, based on a autonomous self in a society which he
himself creates through the social contract, has been changing in
postmodernity. Simondon, a French philosopher of technology with an
important posthumous following in the French-speaking world, has argued
that what was typical for modernity was to 'extract the individual
dimension' of every aspect of reality, of things/processes that are also
always-already related . And what is needed to renew thought, he argued,
was not to go back to premodern wholism, but to systematically build on
the proposition that 'everything is related', while retaining the
achievements of modern thought, i.e. the equally important centrality of
individuality. Thus individuality then comes to be seen as constituted
by relations , from relations.

This proposition, that the individual is now seen as always-already part
of various social fields, as a singular composite being, no longer in
need of socialization, but rather in need of individuation, seems to be
one of the main achievements of what could be called 'postmodern
thought'. Atomistic individualism is rejected in favor of the view of a
relational self , a new balance between individual agency and collective
communion.

In my opinion, as a necessary complement and advance to postmodern
thought, it is necessary to take a third step, i.e. not to be content
with both a recognition of individuality, and its foundation in
relationality, but to also recognize the level of the collective, i.e.
the field in which the relationships occur.

If we only see relationships, we forget about the whole, which is
society itself (and its sub-fields). Society is more than just the sum
of its "relationship parts". Society sets up a 'protocol', in which
these relationships can occur, it forms the agents in their
subjectivity, and consists of norms which enable or disable certain type
of relationships. Thus we have agents, relationships, and fields.
Finally, if we want to integrate the subjective element of human
intentionality, it is necessary to introduce a fourth element: the
object of the sociality.

Indeed, human agents never just 'relate' in the abstract, agents always
relate around an object, in a concrete fashion. Swarming insects do not
seem to have such an object, they just follow instructions and signals,
without a view of the whole, but mammals do. For example, bands of
wolves congregate around the object of the prey. It is the object that
energizes the relationships, that mobilizes the action. Humans can have
more abstract objects, that are located in a temporal future, as an
object of desire. We perform the object in our minds, and activate
ourselves to realize them individually or collectively. P2P projects
organize themselves around such common project, and my own Peer to Peer
theory is an attempt to create an object that can inspire social and
political change.

In summary, for a comprehensive view of the collective, it is now
customary to distinguish 1) the totality of relations; 2) the field in
which these relations operate, up to the macro-field of society itself,
which establishes the 'protocol' of what is possible and not; 3) the
object of the relationship ("object-oriented sociality"), i.e. the
pre-formed ideal which inspires the common action. That sociality is
'object-oriented' is an important antidote to any 'flatland', i.e.
'merely objective' network theory, on which many failed social
networking experiments are based. This idea that the field of relations
is the only important dimension of reality, while forgetting human
intentionality . What we need is a subjective-objective approach to
networks.

In conclusion, this turn to the collective that the emergence of peer to
peer represent does not in any way present a loss of individuality, even
of individualism. Rather it 'transcends and includes' individualism and
collectivism in a new unity, which I would like to call 'cooperative
individualism'. The cooperativity is not necessarily intentional (i.e.
the result of conscious altruism), but constitutive of our being, and
the best applications of P2P, are based on this idea. Similar to Adam
Smith's theory of the invisible hand, the best designed collaborative
systems take advantage of the self-interest of the users, turning it
into collective benefit.

This recognition would help in distinguishing transformative P2P
conceptions from regressive interpretations harking back to premodern
communion. I find this distinction well expressed by Charlene Spretnak,
cited by John Heron in a debate with the conception of an 'inclusional
self' by Ted Lumley of Goodshare.org:

"The ecological/cosmological sense of uniqueness coupled with
intersubjectivity and interbeing…One can accurately speak of the
‘autonomy’ of an individual only by incorporating a sense of the dynamic
web of relationships that are constitutive for that being at a given
moment."

In any case, the balance is again moving towards the collective. But if
the new forms of collective recognize individuality and even
individualism, they are not merely individualist in nature, meaning:
they are not collective individuals, rather, the new collective
expresses itself in the creation of the common. The collective is no
longer the local ‘wholistic’ and ‘oppressive’ community, and it is no
longer the contractually based society with its institutions, now also
seen as oppressive. The new commons is not a unified and transcendent
collective individual, but a collection of large number of singular
projects, constituting a multitude .

This whole change in ontology and epistemology, in ways of feeling and
being, in ways of knowing and apprehending the world, has been
prefigured amongst social scientists and philosophers, including the
hard sciences such as physics and biology .

An important change has been the overthrow of the Cartesian
subject-object split. No longer is the ‘individual self’ looking at the
world as an object. Since postmodernity has established that the
individual is composed and traversed by numerous social fields (of
power, of the unconscious, class relations, gender, etc…), and since
he/she has become aware of this, the subject is now seen (after his
death as an ‘essence’ and a historical construct had been announced by
Foucault), as a perpetual process of becoming (“subjectivation"). His
knowing is now subjective-objective and truth-building has been
transformed from objective and mono-perspectival to multiperspectival.
This individual operates not in a dead space of objects, but in a
network of flows. Space is dynamical, perpetually co-created by the
actions of the individuals and in peer to peer processes, where the
digital noosphere is an extraordinary medium for generating signals
emanating from this dynamical space. The individuals in peer groups,
which are thus not ‘transcendent’ collective individuals, are in a
constant adaptive behavior. Thus peer to peer is global from the start,
it is incorporated in its practice. It is an expression not of
globalization, the worldwide system of domination, but of globality, the
growing interconnected of human relationships.

Peer to peer is to be regarded as a new form of social exchange,
creating its equivalent form of subjectivation, and itself reflecting
the new forms of subjectivation. P2P, interpreted here as a positive and
normative ethos that is implicit in the logic of its practice, though it
rejects the ideology of individualism, does not in any way endanger the
achievements of the modern individual, in terms of the desire and
achievement of personal autonomy, authenticity, etc…. It is no
transcendent power that demands sacrifice of self: in Negrian terms, it
is fully immanent, participants are not given anything up, and unlike
the contractual vision, which is fictitious in any case, the
participation is entirely voluntary. Thus what it reflects is an
expansion of ethics: the desire to create and share, to produce
something useful. The individual who joins a P2P project, puts his
being, unadulterated, in the service of the construction of a common
resource. Implicit is not just a concern for the narrow group, not just
intersubjective relations, but the whole social field surrounding it.

An important aspect is the issue of value, both the value in the sense
of what is exchanged on a market, and the value in the sense of ethical
meaningfulness, i.e. what we value. Peer to peer produces for use value,
not exchange value. The wider community therefore derives 'use value'
from this common form of production. Participants themselves derive
value in two different ways: first, the uptake or not of the
'production' is a sign of the relative value of the product in its wider
field of related offerings. Participants will partake in the general
recognition/valuation of the project in the wider society. Second,
within, a similar form of recognition will operate according to the
contribution of participants. The process is often measured or aided by
social accounting tools specifically designed to that effect, and
individual recognition of effort is always a key element of open source
projects. Peer to peer is therefore also a process of social recognition
and valuation, that replaces or complements money as a token of social
recognition.

How does a successful P2P project operate, in terms of reconciling the
individual and the collective?

Imagine a successful meeting of minds: individual ideas are confronted,
but also changed in the process, through the free association born of
the encounter with other intelligences. Thus eventually a common idea
emerges, that has integrated the differences, not subsumed them. The
participants do not feel they have made concessions or compromises, but
feel that the new common integration is based on their ideas. There has
been no minority, which has succumbed to the majority. There has been no
‘representation’, or loss of difference. Such is the true process of
peer to peer.

An important philosophical change has been the abandonment of the
unifying universalism of the Enlightenment project. Universality was to
be attained by striving to unity, by the transcendence of representation
of political power. But this unity meant sacrifice of difference. Today,
the new epistemological and ontological requirement that P2P reflects,
is not abstract universalism, but the concrete universality of a commons
which has not sacrificed difference. This is the truth that the new
concept of multitude, developed by Toni Negri and inspired by Spinoza,
expresses. P2P is not predicated on representation and unity, but of the
full expression of difference.

Retrieved from
"[?title=6.\_P2P\_in\_the\_Sphere\_of\_Culture\_and\_Self&oldid=15914][]"

-   This page was last modified on 9 October 2007, at 15:05.
-   This page has been accessed 3,971 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /6._P2P_in_the_Sphere_of_Culture_and_Self
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:6._P2P_in_the_Sphere_of_Culture_and_Self&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /6._P2P_in_the_Sphere_of_Culture_and_Self
  [View source]: ?title=6._P2P_in_the_Sphere_of_Culture_and_Self&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=6._P2P_in_the_Sphere_of_Culture_and_Self&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=6.+P2P+in+the+Sphere+of+Culture+and+Self
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/6._P2P_in_the_Sphere_of_Culture_and_Self
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/6._P2P_in_the_Sphere_of_Culture_and_Self
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=6._P2P_in_the_Sphere_of_Culture_and_Self&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=6._P2P_in_the_Sphere_of_Culture_and_Self&oldid=15914
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [6.1.B. Towards ‘contributory’ dialogues of civilizations and
  religions]: /6.1.B._Towards_%E2%80%98contributory%E2%80%99_dialogues_of_civilizations_and_religions
    "6.1.B. Towards ‘contributory’ dialogues of civilizations and religions"
  [6.1.C. Participative Spirituality and the Critique of Spiritual
  Authoritarianism]: /6.1.C._Participative_Spirituality_and_the_Critique_of_Spiritual_Authoritarianism
    "6.1.C. Participative Spirituality and the Critique of Spiritual Authoritarianism"
  [6.1.D. Partnering with nature and the cosmos]: /6.1.D._Partnering_with_nature_and_the_cosmos
    "6.1.D. Partnering with nature and the cosmos"
  [6.1.E. The Emergence of Peer Circles]: /6.1.E._The_Emergence_of_Peer_Circles
    "6.1.E. The Emergence of Peer Circles"
  [?title=6.\_P2P\_in\_the\_Sphere\_of\_Culture\_and\_Self&oldid=15914]:
    ?title=6._P2P_in_the_Sphere_of_Culture_and_Self&oldid=15914
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
