[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

7.1.B. P2P, Postmodernity, Cognitive Capitalism: within and beyond
==================================================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**7.1.B. P2P, Postmodernity, Cognitive Capitalism: within and beyond**

Peer to peer has clearly a dual nature. As we have showed, it is the
very technological infrastructure of cognitive capitalism, the very
organizational mode it needs to implement in its global teams. P2P
exemplifies many of the flexible and fluid aspects characteristic of
fluid modernity (or postmodernity): it disintegrates boundaries and
binary oppositions, blurs the inside and the outside. Just as post- or
late feudal society and its absolutist kings needed the bourgeoisie,
late capitalist society cannot survive without knowledge workers and
their P2P practices. It can be argued that the adoption of P2P processes
is in fact essential for competitiveness: a strong foundation of P2P
technologies, the use of free or open source software, processes for
collective intelligence building, free and fluid cooperation, are now
all necessary facets of the contemporary corporation. The old format of
'pyramidal intelligence', i.e. a hierarchy of command and control, in
its old bureaucratic format, or even as 'management by objectives',
based on the assumption of information scarcity, is increasingly
counter-productive.

At the same time, it cannot cope with it very well, and often P2P is
seen as a threat. The entertainment industry for example, wishes to
destroy P2P technology. In general, corporations are in constant tension
between the logic of self-unfolding peer groups and the profit-driven
logic of the feudally-structured management-by-objectives system, and by
the tension between the cooperative production of innovation and its
private appropriation. The dot.com crisis of 2001 showed how difficult
it is for the present system to convert the new use value into exchange
value, and created an important rift between the affected knowledge
workers and the financial capital, which had taken them on that ride.
After the short-term flourishing of the hope for instant riches in the
dotcom economy, many of them turned their energies to the social sphere,
where internet-based innovation not only continued, but thrived even
more, but now based on explicit P2P modes of cooperation.

Thus, while being part and parcel of the capitalist and postmodern
logics, it also already points beyond it. From the point of view of
capital, it annoys it, but it also needs it to thrive and survive
itself. From the point of view of its practitioners, they like it above
all else, they know it is more productive and creates more value, as
well as meaning in their life and a dense interconnected social life,
but at the same time, they have to make a living and feed their
families. The not-for-profit nature of P2P is at the heart of this
paradox.

This is the great difficulty, and is why its opponents will not fail to
point out the so-called parasitical nature of P2P. P2P creates massive
use-value, but no automatic exchange value, and thus, it cannot fund
itself. It exists on the basis of the vast material wealth created by
the presently existing system. Peer to peer practitioners generally
thrive in the interstices of the system: programmers in between jobs,
workers in bureaucratic organizations with time on their hand; students
and recipients of social aid; private sector professionals during paid
for sabbaticals, academics who integrate it into their research
projects; beneficiaries of corporate or ‘foundation-based’ patronage.
However, in terms of open source software, this is increasingly seen as
essential for technological infrastructure, favored by an increasing
numbers of governments who want an open standard, and also by rivals to
Microsoft, who see it as a means of decreasing their dependency. It is
more and more seen as an efficient means of production, and therefore,
increasingly funded by the private sphere.

Apart from being an objective trend in society, it is also becoming a
subjective demand, because it reflects a desired mode of working and
being. P2P becomes, as it is for this author, part of a positive P2P
ethos.

Therefore, a P2P advocacy emerges, which turns the tables around, and it
becomes a political and social movement. What is the main message of
this emergent movement? I'll try to paraphrase the emerging message,
which is being increasingly clearly formulated:

It says: "it is us knowledge workers who are creating the value in the
monetary system; the present system privately appropriates the results
of a vast cooperative network of value creation (as we argued in our
section about the cooperative nature of cognitive capitalism). Most
value is not created in the formal procedures of the enterprise, but
despite it, because, despite impediments, we remain creative and
cooperative, against all odds. We come to the job, no longer as workers
just renting our bodies, but as total subjectivities, with all we have
learned in our lives, through our myriad social interactions, and solve
present problems through our personal social networks. It is not us
knowledge workers living off on you, but you ‘vectoralists’ living off
on us! We are the ones creating infinite use value, which you want to
render scarce to transform it into tradable intellectual property, but
you cannot do it without us. Even as we struggle to create a commons of
information, in the meantime, while we lack the strength to totally
transform the system, perhaps we will be strong enough to impose
important transitory demands. Therefore, in your own interest, if you
want innovation to continue, instead of ever larger number of us
collapsing from stress-related diseases, you have to give us time and
money. You cannot just use the information commons as an externality,
you have to fund it. Establishing such a system, culminating in the
instauration of a universal wage divorced from work, is in fact the very
condition of your survival as an economic system, and at the same time,
allows us to thrive as knowledge workers, by creating use value, meaning
in our lives, time for learning and renewal, that we will bring back to
your money-making enterprise."

The demand for a universal wage, increasingly debated, subject of
academic research and government reports, and implemented for the first
time in a ‘seed form’ in Brazil by President Lula, may well be the next
great reform of the system, the wise course of action, awaiting its P2P
“neo-Keynes�?, a collective able to translate the needs of the
cooperative ethos in a set of political and ethical measures in the form
of a commons-based political economy. Paradoxically, through the
strengthening of cooperation, it will also re-invigorate cognitive
capitalism (much like the welfare system create mass consumers),
allowing the two logics to co-exist, in cooperation, and in relative
independence from one another, installing a true competition in solving
world problems.

The world system undoubtedly needs a number of important reforms.
Amongst those I can think of is 1) the shift of the monopoly of violence
from the nation-state, to an international cooperative body in charge of
protecting human rights and avoid genocides and ethnic cleansings; it is
no longer acceptable that any nation-state exerts illegitimate violence;
2) the setting up of regulatory bodies for the world economy, so that a
through world society can emerge, in the sense of those proposed by
George Soros, David Held and others; 3) changes in the nature of the
system of capital in the sense described by Paul Hawken, David Korten,
Hazel Henderson, i.e. a form of natural capitalism that can no longer
appropriate the commons and externalize its environmental costs; 4) a
new integral ‘international account’ systems no longer focused on the
endless growth of material production, but on well-being indicators; 5)
changes in the structures of corporations so that it no longer
exclusively reflects the interests of the shareholders, but of all the
stakeholders affected by its operations.

With historical hindsight, such a series of fundamental changes are only
to be expected after major structural crises: they are probably still 20
to 50 years away . In the meantimes, as moles, P2P social forces are
preparing the terrain for such a change.

Perhaps this is the place where I should explain my attitude to
capitalism in a more explicit way. It is a force which has created
material abundance for a part of the world population, but at an
increasingly unacceptable cost. The growth paradigm, the usage without
limit of natural resources, the pauperization of vast areas in the
world, the ‘psychological unsustainability’ of the high stress model
that affects even the elites in the Western states, disqualify its
survival in its current form. The paradox is: the more successful it is
, the more it destroyes the material and spiritual basis of life. But
following Alan Page Fiske’s findings, I also believe that some form of
market exchange will persist, that many people want it. This is why I
think that we should develop strategies geared to the four
intersubjective modes of being together and of making the world: 1)
strengthening peer production and governance; 2) strengthening
reciprocity-based gift economies on the local and regional scale, and
fair trade on the international scale; 3) reforming the market, through
monetary reform, natural capitalism measures, reform of the corporation,
the introduction of multistakeholdership, etc.. 4) reforming the modes
of hierarchy, in particular the state form; making it a supporter or at
least a neutral arbiter in the balance between market exchange and the
commons; introducting peer governance and multistakeholdership modes to
offset bureaucratization.

Retrieved from
"[?title=7.1.B.\_P2P,\_Postmodernity,\_Cognitive\_Capitalism:\_within\_and\_beyond&oldid=1956][]"

-   This page was last modified on 28 November 2005, at 05:48.
-   This page has been accessed 916 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /7.1.B._P2P,_Postmodernity,_Cognitive_Capitalism:_within_and_beyond
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:7.1.B._P2P,_Postmodernity,_Cognitive_Capitalism:_within_and_beyond&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /7.1.B._P2P,_Postmodernity,_Cognitive_Capitalism:_within_and_beyond
  [View source]: ?title=7.1.B._P2P,_Postmodernity,_Cognitive_Capitalism:_within_and_beyond&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=7.1.B._P2P,_Postmodernity,_Cognitive_Capitalism:_within_and_beyond&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=7.1.B.+P2P%2C+Postmodernity%2C+Cognitive+Capitalism%3A+within+and+beyond
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/7.1.B._P2P,_Postmodernity,_Cognitive_Capitalism:_within_and_beyond
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/7.1.B._P2P,_Postmodernity,_Cognitive_Capitalism:_within_and_beyond
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=7.1.B._P2P,_Postmodernity,_Cognitive_Capitalism:_within_and_beyond&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=7.1.B._P2P,_Postmodernity,_Cognitive_Capitalism:_within_and_beyond&oldid=1956
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=7.1.B.\_P2P,\_Postmodernity,\_Cognitive\_Capitalism:\_within\_and\_beyond&oldid=1956]:
    ?title=7.1.B._P2P,_Postmodernity,_Cognitive_Capitalism:_within_and_beyond&oldid=1956
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
