[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

7.1.D. Possible political strategies
====================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**7.1.D. Possible political strategies**

In the meantime, while the three scenarios are competing to come into
being, and if we are sympathetic to the emergence of P2P and its ethos
of cooperation: “What is to be done"?

A first step is to become aware of the isomorphism, the commonality, of
peer to peer processes in the various fields. That people devising and
using P2P sharing programs, start realizing that they are somehow doing
the same thing than the alterglobalisation movement, and that both are
related to the production of Linux, and to participative epistemologies.
Thus what we must do first is building bridges of cooperation and
understanding across the social fields. Amazingly, it has already
started, as the last Porto Alegre forum showed an extraordinary
enthusiastic reaction to the Open Source event, something that would
have been unimaginable even a few years ago. This coalescing of a
powerful social and political movement, a movement of movements, seems
already to be happening: the alterglobalisation movement, the free
software/open source movement, the open access and peer science
movements, the forces aligned against biopiracy and the new intellectual
property enclosures, the free culture movement, the environmental and
other protectors of our physical commons, and others, seem increasingly
to find each other.

We should also start to realize our basic commonality with earlier forms
of the cooperative ethos: the communal shareholding of the tribal
peoples, the solidarity movements and mutualities of the industrial
workers. Following the analysis of Mckenzie Wark we should say that both
knowledge workers (the hacker class for MW), workers, and farmers as
producing classes share a similar interest in achieving first, a fairer
share of the distribution of the surplus (the reformist agenda), and
second, achieving control of the means of production (the more radical
agenda). Of course, this can no longer take the form of centralized
state control, and awaits innovative social practices and demands . It
is our contention that they will be centered around the peer governance
of the Commons. However, creating the new social reality takes
precedence over political demands, the latter having to be a consequence
of the former. Today to resist is in the first place 'to create'.

Therefore, the second step is to "furiously" build the commons. When we
develop Linux, it is there, cannot be destroyed, and by its very
existence and use, builds another reality, based on another social
logic, the P2P logic. Adopting a network sociality and building dense
interconnections as we participate in knowledge creation and exchange is
enormously politically significant. By feeding our immaterial and
spiritual needs outside of the consumption system, we can stop the logic
which is destroying our ecosphere. The present system may not like
opposition, but even more does it fear indifference, because it can feed
on the energy of strife, but starts dying when it is shunted. This is
what is being expressed by Toni Negri's concept of Exodus, and what
other call 'Desertion' . These commentators note that it was 'the
refusal of work' in the seventies, with blue-collar workers showing
increasing dissatisfaction with the Taylorist/Fordist system of work,
that lead to the fundamental re-arrangement of work in the first place.
In the past, the labor movement and other social movements mostly shared
the same values, and it was mostly about a fairer share of the pie. But
the new struggles are mostly about producing a new kind of pie, and
producing it in a different way. Or perhaps an even more correct
metaphor: it is about the right to produce altogether different kinds of
pie.

Today, the new ethic says that 'to resist is in the first place to
create'. The world we want is the world we are creating through our
cooperative P2P ethos, it is visible in what we do today, not an utopian
creation for the future. Building the commons has a crucial ingredient:
the building of a dense alternative media network, for permanent and
collective self-education in human culture, away from the
mass-consumption model promoted by the corporate media.

Thus, if there is an 'offensive' strategy it would look like this: to
build the commons, day after day, the process of creating of a society
within society. In this context, the emergence of the internet and the
web, is a tremendous step forward. Unlike in earlier social formations,
knowledge workers and others now have access to an important “vector of
information", to a means for creating, producing, and distributing
immaterial products that was not available in earlier ages . Part of the
struggle to build the information commons is the struggle for the
control of the code (achieving protocollary power) and the creation of a
‘friendly’ legal framework, continuing the efforts pioneered by Richard
Stallman and the General Public License and Lawrence Lessig’s Copyleft
and 'Creative Commons'.

The third step is the defensive strategy. When the commons is attacked,
it needs to be defended. We are thinking of the struggle in the EU to
avoid software patents , avoiding the installment of digital rights
management encoded in the hardware; the struggle against biopiracy;
against the privatization of water.

Above all else what we need is a society that allows the building of the
commons, and it is therefore important to refuse measures that would
foreclose this development. Hence the importance of the intellectual
property regime, which needs to be reformed to avoid a ‘Enclosure of the
Digital Commons", and also, we have to develop an awareness of the
intricacies of protocollary power. Since we have no idea about the time
span needed for a fuller transition to a P2P civilization, what me must
do in the meantime is to protect the seed, so that it can grow
unimpeded, until such time as it is called for a greater role.

I would guess that an important part of the struggle for decent life for
all, important to make space for the development of cooperative
practices, will be the instauration of a universal living wage . So that
no one dies from hunger, poverty and exclusion from the world of
culture. So than an increasing number of us can start working on the
creation of real use value, instead of catering to the artificial
desires concocted by the global advertising system.

The aim of peer to peer theory is to eventually develop a differentiated
and integrated strategy for political and social change. Because it is
based on a differentiated understanding of intersubjective processes, as
developed in the relational model of Alan Page Fiske, it realizes that
the four modes (equality matching, authority ranking, market pricing,
and communal shareholding) have always existed, though in different
combinations. It is a fair summary to say that the tribal era was
dominated by gift economy modes based on reciprocity; that is was
followed by the tributary class societies of the agricultural age, based
on authority ranking; and that the industrial age was determined by
market pricing. The current industrial era has been marked by the
attempt to create a state-based authoritarianism (communism) as an
alternative to market pricing; and by the current attempt at market
totalitarianism under neoliberalism, which is in the process of failing.
Peer to peer theory aims to offer a third alternative: not a
commons-based totalitarianism, but a society where the other modes are
informed by the peer to peer principles of civil society: a
commons-based society within a reformed state and a reformed market.
That’s also how it differs from the anarchist and socialist models that
hoped for a marketless and stateless society.

Such a differentiated and integrated strategy would be based on fourfold
interventions in the different relational and productive domains:

Reform of the stae and global governance modes: We also wish for the
creation of democratic peer to peer processes so that they can
contribute to solving some of the crucial issues facing the world. This
is why the demands of the alterglobalisation movement are sometimes
considered vague. It is because, in this complex world, we know that we
do not have all the answers. But we also know, that through a community
of peers, through open processes, answers and solutions can emerge, in a
way that they cannot if private interests and domination structures are
not transcended. Thus a reform of the global governance system is very
important, so that every human being voice can be heard.. Current global
governance institutions, as they are organized today (IMF, World Bank,
WTO), often impede the finding of solutions because they are instruments
of domination, rather than at the service of the world population. It is
thus not just a matter of an alternative political program, but of
alternative processes to arrive at the best solutions. I do not
personally believe, that change can come \<only\> from the autonomous
processes of civil society, and that attention to the state form is
therefore important. Thus politically, peer to peer advocates are
interested in the transformation of the nation-state, to new forms open
to the processes of globality and locality, to participatory processes,
such as the ones practiced with P2P formats. The search and development
of peer governance practices, based on new forms of leadership, will be
crucial.

The reform of the market is equally important. An economic system that
destroys the biosphere, that is predicated on unending growth in a
finite physical universe, is not sustainable. The current monetary
system, appropriate for the needs and profits of an elite, can only
invests ten percent in the productivity economy. It must be replaced by
smarter complementary currencies, and on a major monetary reform that
changes scarcity-based money systems, and their hidden protocols of
exclusion, into participatory protocols.

Regarding the commons such an approach would entail:

​1) a defense of the physical commons and the development of new
institutions such as trusts to manage the environment;

​2) an end to exaggerated private appropriation of the knowledge
commons;

​3) a universal basic income to create the conditions for the expansion
of peer production;

​4) any measure that speeds up the distribution of capital.

In the field of the gift economy: the promotion of reciprocity-based
schemes, using alternative currency schemes based on equal time (Time
Dollars and the like)

Finally, peer to peer also demands self-transformation. As we said, P2P
is predicated on abundance, on transcending the animal impulse based on
win-lose games. But abundance is not just objective, i.e. also, and
perhaps most importantly, subjective. This is why tribal economies
considered themselves to live in abundance, and were egalitarian in
nature. This is why happiness researchers show that it is not poverty
that makes us unhappy, but inequality. Thus, the P2P ethos demands a
conversion, to a point of view, to a set of skills, which allow us to
focus ourselves to fulfilling our immaterial and spiritual needs
directly, and not through a perverted mechanism of consumption. As we
focus on friendships, connections, love, knowledge exchange, the
cooperative search for wisdom, the construction of common resources and
use value, we direct our attention away from the artificial needs that
are currently promoted, and this time we personally and collectively
stop feeding the Beast that we have ourselves created.

Retrieved from
"[?title=7.1.D.\_Possible\_political\_strategies&oldid=40545][]"

[Category][]:

-   [P2P Theory][]

-   This page was last modified on 8 July 2010, at 16:42.
-   This page has been accessed 1,391 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /7.1.D._Possible_political_strategies
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:7.1.D._Possible_political_strategies&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /7.1.D._Possible_political_strategies
  [View source]: ?title=7.1.D._Possible_political_strategies&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=7.1.D._Possible_political_strategies&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=7.1.D.+Possible+political+strategies
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/7.1.D._Possible_political_strategies
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/7.1.D._Possible_political_strategies
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=7.1.D._Possible_political_strategies&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=7.1.D._Possible_political_strategies&oldid=40545
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=7.1.D.\_Possible\_political\_strategies&oldid=40545]: ?title=7.1.D._Possible_political_strategies&oldid=40545
  [Category]: /Special:Categories "Special:Categories"
  [P2P Theory]: /Category:P2P_Theory "Category:P2P Theory"
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
