[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

7. P2P and Social Change
========================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**7. P2P and Social Change**

**7.1.A. Marginal trend or premise of new civilization?**

[7.1.B. P2P, Postmodernity, Cognitive Capitalism: within and beyond][]

[7.1.C. Three scenarios of co-existence][]

[7.1.D. Possible political strategies][]

[7.1.E. Towards a civil society-based ‘Common-ism’?][]

\
 **7.1.A. Marginal trend or premise of new civilization?**

I hope to have convinced the reader of this essay that Peer to Peer is a
fundamental trend, a new and emergent form of social exchange, of the
same form, an ‘isomorphism’, that is occurring throughout the human
lifeworld, in all areas of social and cultural life, where it operates
under a set of similar characteristics. In other words, it has
coherence.

How important is it, and what are its political implications? Can it
really be said, as I claim, that it is the premise of a new
civilizational order? I want to bring out a few historical analogies to
illustrate my point.

The first concerns the historical development of capitalism. At some
point in the Middle Ages, starting in the 11th to 13th cy. period,
cities start to appear again, and commerce takes up. A new class of
people specialize in that commerce, and finding some aspects of medieval
culture antithetic to their pursuits, start inventing new instruments to
create trust across great distances: early forms of contracts, early
banking systems etc.. In turn, these new forms of social exchange create
new processes of subjectivation, which not only influence the people
involved, but in fact the whole culture at large, eventually leading to
massive cultural changes such as the Renaissance, the Reformation, the
Enlightenment and the great social revolutions (English, French,
American, etc..). In this scenario, though the emergent bourgeois class
was not directly political, what it did, i.e. its primary business of
conducting commerce, inevitably created a political and civilisational
chain reaction. This class also had a resource, capital (money), which
was greatly needed by the other leading sectors of the population,
especially the feudal class and the kings. Even today, for capital,
politics is a secondary effect, their enormous power is an effect of
what they do in the economic sphere: trading currency and shares,
international capital flows, investments of multinational companies, the
results of a myriad of small decisions by economic regularity bodies
such as the IMF, etc..

Today, I would argue, we witness a similar phenomena. A new class of
knowledge workers, in its broad sense already the majority of the
working population in the West, and poised to be in the same situation
elsewhere in a few decades, are creating new practices and tools that
enable them to do what they need to do, i.e. knowledge exchange. As they
create these new tools, bringing into being a new format of social
exchange, they enable new types of subjectivation, which in turn not
only changes themselves, but the world around them. When Marx wrote his
Manifesto, there were only 100,000 industrial workers, yet he saw that
this new social model was the essence of the new society being born.
Similarly, even if today only a few million knowledge workers
consciously practice P2P, one can see the birth of a new model of a much
larger social consequence. This new model is inherently more productive
in creating the new immaterial use value, just as the merchants and
capitalists were more effective in the material economy. Thus, they have
something of value, i.e. knowledge and innovation, which is needed by
the whole society, as even agricultural and industrial production can no
longer proceed without their intervention. As this feedback loop is
reinforcing itself, the political consequences are equally secondary. By
creating new social forms, they, we, are doing politics, in the sense of
creating new realities. This does not mean that civil society alone can
create a full civilisational change, as, inevitably, political conflicts
and new lines of contention arise, that will draw in the adepts of the
new modes of being into the political world. We have already seen how it
is to a great degree the legal and technical sabotage of the enemies of
P2P, which have driven forward its development.

The great issue will be the reform of the state and the global
governance system. But the P2P social forces come prepared, with highly
efficient modes of organization and knowledge building.

Another analogy I like is the one exposed by Negri in Empire, where he
refers to the Christians. The Roman Empire, in a structural course of
decline, could not be reformed, but at the same time, within it, the
Christians were creating new forms of consciousness and organization,
which, when the imperial structure collapsed, was ready to merge with
the invading Barbarians and created the new European civilization of the
Middle Ages. There are no Barbarians today, only other rising capitalist
blocks such as the East Asian one, but they are in the process of
creating the very same social configuration, which has created P2P in
the West, though it will take a little more time. Civilisational
differences will not, in my opinion, preclude the development of
cognitive capitalism and the emergence of P2P modes of social exchange.

Finally, let us put our findings in the context of some social
scientists.

First, Marcel Mauss, and his notion of ‘total social fact’ ; second, to
the notion of Cornelis Castoriadis, that societies are coherent wholes
and systems, otherwise they would collapse, animated by a particular
kind of ‘social spirit’ that is the result of our social imaginary.
Democratic capitalism was prepared by such an imaginary, the result of
the religious civil wars and the strong desire to go beyond the feudal
adversarial model. But today, even as it is being globalized, its
premises are dying at the same time they are being exacerbated. The
emergence of P2P is therefore to be considered both as a total social
fact, and as the birth of a new social imaginary. P2P is a revolt of the
social imaginary about the total fictionalization of our society, about
its near-total and growing determination by instrumental reason and
efficiency thinking, that is now even infecting our social and personal
lives. It is a vivid protest, a longing for a different life, not solely
dictated by calculation and the overriding concern for profit and
productivity. It is not just protest against the intolerable facets of
postmodern life, but always already also a construction of alternatives.
Not an utopia, but really existing social practice. And a practice
founded on a still unconscious, but coherent set of principles, i.e. a
new social imaginary. It is totally coherent, a total social fact.

Habermas has another important notion, which is the ‘principle of
organization’ of society, and he distinguishes the primitive,
traditional and liberal-capitalist principles of organization. He
defines it as the innovations that become possible through ‘new levels
of societal learning’. Such a level determines the learning mechanism on
which the development of productive forces depend, the range of
variation for the interpretative systems that secure identity, amongst
others key factors. It would seem clear that P2P is precisely such a new
learning mechanism, described in most detail in the book by Pekka
Himanen, as well as in the new rules I have identified in this essay.
Thus in Habermassian terms, we would have to conclude that P2P is a
fourth principle of organization, emerging at this stage, but which
could become dominant at a later stage.

We’ll leave the latter open as a hypothesis, since history is an open
process, and indeed different logics can co-exist. For example, in
democratic capitalism, the two logics of democracy and capitalism are
co-existing together, forming a coherent whole, even though its fabric
is now in crisis.

My interpretation of P2P is related to the interpretation of Stephan
Merten and the Oekonux group in Germany, but whereas they see the
principles behind Free Software as indicative as a new mode of social
exchange, I have broadened their area of application. Free Software is,
in my interpretation, one of the forms of the P2P form of social
exchange. While Free Software appears important, especially when taken
together with the more liberal Open Source format, it is still more
marginal than P2P. When we look at the same phenomena through the P2P
lens, the social changes appear much more profound, much more important,
than Free Software taking alone. We are much further ahead of the curve
if we follow the P2P interpretation.

Nevertheless, when I talk, in such an optimistic and visionary fashion,
about the emergence of P2P and it being the premise of a coming
fundamental civilisational change, I can of course also see the terrible
trends that are affecting our world: fossil energy depletion, global
warming, increased inequality inside and between countries, the tearing
apart of the social fabric, the increased psychic insecurity affecting
the whole world population, the imposition of a permanent war regime
that is dismantling civil rights and re-introducing the systematic use
of torture and lifelong imprisonment without trial in the heart of the
West, the great extinction affecting biodiversity … All these things are
happening, and disheartening, even though counter-trends from civil
society are also sometimes hopeful. Certainly, it seems that the power
structure of Empire, the new form of global sovereignty, is beyond
reform, that it just routs around protest and democracy, making dissent
marginal and inconsequential, even as 25 million people were protesting
an illegitimate war in one single day. Corporate media machines will
devote days on end on the trial of a celebrity, but totally ignore
massive literacy campaigns in Venezuela, and millions of people
demonstrating will deserve just a few seconds of coverage. But
historically, it is also when change ‘inside’ the system becomes
impossible, that the greatest revolutions occur. The evening before the
momentous events of May 68, the columnist Bernard Poirot-Delpech wrote
in Le Monde: nothing ever changes, we are bored in this country …

The question of timing is difficult to answer. Objectively, it could
take centuries, if we take the historical examples of the transition
from ancient slavery to feudalism, or from feudalism to capitalism.
Similar to the current situation, both ancient slavery (in the form of
the conatus system of production, which freed slaves but bound them to
the land, as of the 2nd and 3rd century), and feudalism, had the germs
of the new system already within them. However, the precipitation of
climatic, economic, political crises affecting the current world system,
as well as the general speeding up of cultural change processes, seem to
point towards changes that could proceed on a much more faster scale. If
I may allow myself a totally unscientific prediction, then I would say
that a culmination of systemic crises, and the resulting reform of the
global governance system, is about two to four decades away. But in
another sense, such predictions are totally immaterial to the task at
hand. We need P2P today, in order to make our lives more fulfilling, to
realize our social imaginary in our own lifetime, and to develop the set
of methodologies that will be needed, that are needed, to help solve the
developing crisis. We do not have the luxury of waiting for a dawn to
come. A good example of the maturity of the system for change is what
happened in Argentina: when the economy totally collapsed, in a matter
of months, the country’s population had built a series of P2P-based
barter and alternative money systems (the largest in the world to date),
and the significant movement of the Piqueteros arose, which, demanded
and got from the state a major concession: that state money for the
unemployed would not go to individuals, but the movement as a whole to
invest in cooperative projects. It all depends on the dialectic between
the crises and what the system still can offer. But if the system fails
to provide the hope and the realization of a decent life, such an event
precipitates the building of alternatives that have many of the aspects
of P2P that we described.

Retrieved from "[?title=7.\_P2P\_and\_Social\_Change&oldid=2011][]"

-   This page was last modified on 29 November 2005, at 04:54.
-   This page has been accessed 3,194 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /7._P2P_and_Social_Change "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: /Talk:7._P2P_and_Social_Change
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /7._P2P_and_Social_Change
  [View source]: ?title=7._P2P_and_Social_Change&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=7._P2P_and_Social_Change&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=7.+P2P+and+Social+Change
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/7._P2P_and_Social_Change
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/7._P2P_and_Social_Change
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=7._P2P_and_Social_Change&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=7._P2P_and_Social_Change&oldid=2011
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [7.1.B. P2P, Postmodernity, Cognitive Capitalism: within and beyond]: /7.1.B._P2P,_Postmodernity,_Cognitive_Capitalism:_within_and_beyond
    "7.1.B. P2P, Postmodernity, Cognitive Capitalism: within and beyond"
  [7.1.C. Three scenarios of co-existence]: /7.1.C._Three_scenarios_of_co-existence
    "7.1.C. Three scenarios of co-existence"
  [7.1.D. Possible political strategies]: /7.1.D._Possible_political_strategies
    "7.1.D. Possible political strategies"
  [7.1.E. Towards a civil society-based ‘Common-ism’?]: /7.1.E._Towards_a_civil_society-based_%E2%80%98Common-ism%E2%80%99%3F
    "7.1.E. Towards a civil society-based ‘Common-ism’?"
  [?title=7.\_P2P\_and\_Social\_Change&oldid=2011]: ?title=7._P2P_and_Social_Change&oldid=2011
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
