[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

Appendix 1: Methodology for Research and Interpretation of P2P Theory
=====================================================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**Appendix 1: Methodology for Research and Interpretation of P2P
Theory**

\
 **A. The use of a integral framework**

\
 (see below for **B. The Sociology of Form and Fiske's Intersubjective
Typology**)

\
 One word about my methodology. I have been inspired by mostly two
traditions or methods of inquiry: the integral method, and the sociology
of form.

I use as heuristic device, and as such device only, the four quadrant
system developed by Ken Wilber (Wilber, 2001). This does not mean I
share the conclusions of his ‘Theory of Everything’, which I think are
seriously flawed. But as a method for assembling, presenting and
understanding my data, I find it to be extremely useful. The four
quadrant system organizes reality in ‘four aspects’, which encompass the
subjective (evolution of self and subjectivity), the materiality of the
single organism (objectivity), the intersubjective (the interaction of
groups of subjectivities and the worldviews and cultures they so
create), and the behavior of groups of objects, i.e. the interobjective
perspective of systems. The integral theory tradition tries to construct
a narrative of the unfolding cosmic processes, in explanatory frameworks
that enfolds them all. It also does this historically, trying to make
sense of an evolutionary logic, trying to enfold the different
historical phases into a unified human understanding. Apart from the
'neoconservative' Wilberian version of integral theory, I have equally
been influenced by the 'critical integral theory', or anti-systemic
'materialist-subjectivist' account of Toni Negri (Negri, 2001)

If you’d place explanatory theories about the evolution of
matter/life/consciousness into 2 axis define by the ‘relative attention
given to either the parts or to the whole’, and another one ‘relative
attention given to difference or to similarities’, integral theory would
be that kind of hermeneutical system that pays most attention to the
whole, and to structural similarities, rather than to the parts and to
difference. In doing this it runs counter to the general tendency of
modern objective science to focus on parts (to be analytical), of
postmodernism to focus on difference, and hence to reject integrative
narratives, and to systems theories and its follow-ups, which ignore
subjectivity. It is this distinction from dominant epistemologies, which
makes it particularly interesting to uncover new insights, missed by the
other approaches. It is not superior, but complementary to other
approaches . But a key advantage of the integral framework is that it
integrates both subjective and objective aspects of realities, refusing
to reduce one to the other.

\
 To conclude, generally speaking, an integral approach is one that:

\
 - respects the relative autonomy of the different fields, and looks for
field specific laws

- affirms that new levels of complexity causes the emergence of new
properties and thus rejects reductionisms that try to explain the highly
complex from the less complex

- always relates the objective and subjective aspects, refusing to see
any one aspect as a mere epiphenomenona of the other. This implies a
certain agnosticism as to the theories that posit one particular
quadrant as the more fundamental cause (such as for example historical
materialism)

- in general, attempts to correlate explanations emanating from the
various fields, in order to arrive at an integrative understanding

\

My modified form of the four-quadrant system starts with the
‘exterior-individual’, i.e. single objects in space and time, i.e. the
evolution of the material basis of the universe, life, and brain (the
evolution from atoms to molecules to cells etc..), but in my personal
modification, this quadrant includes technological evolution, as I (and
others such as McLuhan, 1994) can legitimately see technology as an
extension of the human body. Second, we will look at the systems
(exterior-collective) quadrant: the evolution of natural, political,
economic, social and organizational systems. Third, we will look at the
interior-collective quadrant: human culture, spiritualities,
philosophies, worldviews. In the fourth quadrant we will be discussing
the interior-individual aspects, and we look at changes occurring within
the sphere of the self. However, in practice, despite my stated
intention, I have found it difficult to separate individual and
collective aspects of subjectivity and they are provisionally treated in
one section. That this is so is not surprising, since one of the aspects
of peer to peer is it participative nature, which sees the individual
always-already embedded in social processes. In the context of such a
relational self, characterized by a 'cooperative individualism', and a
network sociality which is also predicated on a retention of the
achieved individuation aspects, it makes sense to cover both aspects
together.

\
 **Figure 1: Typology of scientific approaches (ways of looking at the
world)**: not available in this version

\
 **Figure 2: An integral framework for understanding P2P**: not
available in this version

\
 The combined use of the four quadrants also has important advantages in
avoiding various kinds of reductionisms:

\
 1) the analytical-materialist reductionism (scientism), which attempts
to totally explain the world of life and culture by the properties and
processes of matter

​2) the biological/Darwinist reductionism, which attempts to totally
explain the life of culture by the animalistic processes of survival of
the fittest.

​3) The 'wholistic' reductionism of the system sciences, which do not
take into account the agency of the subject

​4) The linguistic reductionism of extreme postmodernists, which tend to
totally bypass materiality and reduce everything to language games

\
 In conclusion: the integral approach allows us to use these various
partial perspectives and to use them as heuristic devices, so that we
can obtain a fuller picture combining them. What distinguishes an
'integral approach' from the other approaches is its use of a
subjective-objective explanatory framework.

Reading the manuscript, many readers may ask themselves: what is most
important: 1) the change and evolution of human consciousness; or 2) the
material structures in which P2P is embedded. I will discuss this more
in detail in the section on 'technological determinism', but here I want
to point out how an integral approach avoids a chicken and the egg
debate. Yes, P2P reflects prior changes in human consciousness (before
being implemented, they were thought, and these thoughts reflects new
ways of feeling/being/knowing/valuing); but also, the existence of
technological and other structures enables further changes in human
mentalities. What an integral approach allows us to do, if we are
interested in promoting social and political change, is to device
strategies that are active in the different quadrants at the same time,
and so create a positive feedback loop between them.

In the following pages, I do not aim to create a 'Theory of Everything'.
I try to function as an integrator, as everyone is obliged to do today,
i.e. construct temporary and malleable integrative understandings, which
are then confronted with other ones. The only moral and scientific
obligation is that such integration embrace as much of reality, as one
possibly can. Thus, the following is an integration of all the
descriptive, explanatory and social-evolutionary (i.e. historicized in
social formations) strands, that I can possibly hold together in a
coherent fashion. And the 'object' of this integration is 'Peer to
Peer'.

\
 **B. The Sociology of Form and Fiske's Intersubjective Typology**

\
 If the above integral approach has guided me as a safeguard to avoid
proposing overtly reductionist interpretations and to cast my net as
wide as possible, as well as for the organization of the subject matter,
then the search for 'isomorphism' has been of great value in precisely
defining what P2P is and how it differs from its close cousins, such as
the gift economy. The method involves looking at the emergence of a same
form throughout the social field, to define its precise characteristics
in a ideal type as we gathered more information, which then in turn
again helps in differentiating 'pure P2P' from its derivatives. The
sociology of form focuses neither on the parts (individuals and their
choices), nor on the collective as a whole (society and its
socialization), but on the interaction between the parts, their 'form of
exchange' .

Particular usage is made of Alan Page Fiske's (see section 3.4 for a
description and Fiske, 1993) quaternary model of human intersubjective
relationships, a typology of four forms through which humans can relate
to each other. Therefore this book, as an attempt to develop a P2P
theory, is a description of one of the major forms, which Fiske calls
'Communal Shareholding'. And the key argument of the book is that P2P is
actually a new form of Communal Shareholding and I will discuss in
detail how it differs from the three other forms of intersubjectivity.
Fiske's framework gives a larger context of yet to be fully developed
theory of social change which should encompass four basic constituents,
as well as a theory of how they relate together in the contemporary
social system.

\
 - Market theory: how can we think either about a 'market without
capitalism' or at the very least about a 'deeply socialized capitalism'.
Since I believe that the present format of neoliberal capitalism is
unsustainable both in natural and psychic resources, and given that some
form of market is both acceptable and necessary, how do we formulate a
new market theory? A market within society has almost always existed,
and is acceptable, but what is not acceptable is a 'market society',
where everything is determined through a market.

- Hierarchy theory or state theory: how do we achieve forms of
leadership which promote participation rather than aim at the extension
of their own monopolies. I should be looking to theories of servant
leadership, leaderless corporations, and the like. How do we get a state
that is not beholden to monopolistic corporate interests, but can offer
a fair arbitrage, in the public interest, between market-, gift economy,
and P2P-based alternatives. How to develop peer governance and
multistakeholdership?

- Gift Economy theory: how can we reinstate/reinforce material
production based on reciprocity and cooperative relationships. The key
here is to investigate 'complementary currencies' and cooperative
production generally.

Retrieved from
"[?title=Appendix\_1:\_Methodology\_for\_Research\_and\_Interpretation\_of\_P2P\_Theory&oldid=2016][]"

-   This page was last modified on 29 November 2005, at 05:04.
-   This page has been accessed 2,648 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /Appendix_1:_Methodology_for_Research_and_Interpretation_of_P2P_Theory
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:Appendix_1:_Methodology_for_Research_and_Interpretation_of_P2P_Theory&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /Appendix_1:_Methodology_for_Research_and_Interpretation_of_P2P_Theory
  [View source]: ?title=Appendix_1:_Methodology_for_Research_and_Interpretation_of_P2P_Theory&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=Appendix_1:_Methodology_for_Research_and_Interpretation_of_P2P_Theory&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Appendix+1%3A+Methodology+for+Research+and+Interpretation+of+P2P+Theory
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/Appendix_1:_Methodology_for_Research_and_Interpretation_of_P2P_Theory
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/Appendix_1:_Methodology_for_Research_and_Interpretation_of_P2P_Theory
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=Appendix_1:_Methodology_for_Research_and_Interpretation_of_P2P_Theory&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=Appendix_1:_Methodology_for_Research_and_Interpretation_of_P2P_Theory&oldid=2016
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [?title=Appendix\_1:\_Methodology\_for\_Research\_and\_Interpretation\_of\_P2P\_Theory&oldid=2016]:
    ?title=Appendix_1:_Methodology_for_Research_and_Interpretation_of_P2P_Theory&oldid=2016
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
