[][]

##### Namespaces

-   [Page][]
-   [Discussion][]

#### 

##### Variants[][1]

[Share this][]

##### Views

-   [Read][]
-   [View source][]
-   [View history][]

##### Actions[][1]

##### Search

![Search][]

##### Personal tools

-   [Log in][]

##### p2pfoundation

-   [Wiki Main Page][]
-   [Blog [EN]][]
-   [Blog [GR]][]
-   [Ning Network][]

##### Navigation

-   [Recent changes][]
-   [Random page][]
-   [Help][]
-   [Donations][]

##### Toolbox

-   [What links here][]
-   [Related changes][]
-   [Special pages][]
-   [Printable version][]
-   [Permanent link][]

Appendix 4: Reactions to the Essay: Kudo's
==========================================

From P2P Foundation

Jump to: [navigation][], [search][]

**Appendix 4: Reactions to the Essay: Kudo's**

A compilation of positive reactions on this essay and its expression of
the P2P 'meme':

- **George Dafermos**, at [http://radio.weblogs.com/0117128/][]

"Michel Bauwens is the author of the most visionary piece on
peer-to-peer I've ever read, published his much-awaited new essay on
P2P, entitled P2P and Human Evolution: p2p as the premise of a new mode
of civilization. As expected, his excellent and path-breaking treatise
is all-encompassing, critically exploring P2P in all its possible
manifestations and linkages, that is, with respect to its political,
social, economic, spiritual, cultural, and technological implications.
It is at the intersections of all these spheres and their interactions
that P2P holds the potential to emerge as the basis of the new
civilisation premised on self-realisation, autonomy, creation, eros, and
sharing. It's either that or a return to barbarism, writes Bauwens. Read
on and marvel at the mental syntheses that this essay invokes."

- Peer to Peer weblog / **Unmediated** at
[http://p2p.weblogsinc.com/entry/1234000653037158/][]

"Michel Bauwens has written a phenomenal essay entitled P2P and Human
Evolution: Placing Peer to Peer Theory in an Integral Framework. It's
long and much of it goes far over my head, but reads like a P2P
manifesto�? Bauwens even concludes by calling it a guide to an active
participation in the transformation of our world, into something better,
more participative, more free, more creative. Really quite fascinating."

- **Integral Foresight Institute, Chris Stewart**

"What Michael Bauwens has achieved in a very short space fullfills the
same function as the Communist Manifesto once did: a call for a
worldwide movement for social and political change, firmly rooted in the
objective and subjective changes of contempary society, and articulated
as a practical and insightful model of human value and power relations
that is ahead of its time. If we listen more carefully to Bauwens than
we ever did Marx, however, it just might lead to a smooth evolution for
humanity rather than revolution, or at worst, destruction. Bauwens has
traced out real contours of hope for Western civilization. His
presentation of a P2P perspective includes a clear theory of human power
and value relations, a practical appreciation of its relationship to the
current orthodoxy, and an inspiring vision for viable, sustainable, and
desirable futures. Just as Bauwens notes the limited social acceptance
of Marx at the time of his writing, it may well be that in years to come
Bauwens’s articulate and deeply considered insights will not only be as
profoundly influential and valuable but, crucially, a lot more
workable."

\
 - P2P and Integral Theory – **Generation Sit weblog**

"I rarely encounter essays addressing Integral Theory in the context of
emerging technology. But if there's one thing out there worth reading,
this essay is one of them -- P2P and Human Evolution: Placing Peer to
Peer Theory in an Integral Framework (via IntegralWorld). This very long
essay describes P2P in detail, covering the interior and exterior
aspects, and its incompatibilities with Spiral Dynamics and Integral
Theory. There are a lot of heady stuff for me to digest in this essay.
And I'm still not done reading it."

\
 - **John Heron**, Participatory Spirituality pioneer, author of Sacred
Science

"What I appreciate is your clarity with regard to the following: your
basic definition of p2p; the way you trace this definition, and any
compromises and departures from it, within its many manifestations; and
toward the end of your account, forms co-existence and of possible
political strategies. All of this is very valuable food for thought and
action. You make a most effective and persuasive case for the widespread
significance of the p2p phenomenon, in diverse fields, and with due
regard for the underlying epistemological shifts involved. This work is
indeed a major achievement of scholarship, insight, moral vision and
political imagination."

\
 - **Larry Penslinger**, author of The Moon at Hoa Binh

“I have been reading your essay. The information in book form is far
easier to approach than the online newsletter, of course. This is truly
a great introduction to this field of thought. A major accomplishment,
even in its present "a work in progress" stage. Thank you very much for
making this available. One of the very useful aspects of P2P&HE, I find,
is contextualization of the notes with their many website referrals.
This allows me to follow out the ideas in a coherent fashion. A
significant body of this material has been available only in French,
which I do not read, and much of it remains untranslated. However, much
information is now available in Englishon the net concerning what
remains untranslated, and P2P&HE is an excellent guide.�?

\

- **Victor Lewis-Hansom**, by email:

"At first skim reading, I think that the spark you have created in our
historical times, will be historically significant and remembered. Thank
you for putting so much of yourself into your essay."

\
 - **Darren Sharp**, by email

"Just read your outstanding 'P2P and Human Evolution: Peer to Peer as
the premise of a new mode of civilization.' I've got to say, I was blown
away by your bold synthesis of such complex material."

\
 **French-language Reactions:**

\

    - Yves Simon at http://www.social-computing.com/showitem.php?ID=137 

"Michel Bauwens est un personnage connu du monde de la nouvelle
économie. Il a rendu public une dernière mouture de son essai courant
mars 2005 : P2P and Human Evolution : Peer to peer as the premise of a
new mode of civilization

Un article dans la revue belge Imagine Magazine présente les conclusions
de cette étude. Michel Bauwens estime que les technologies peer to peer
ne sont que les prémisses de la constitution d'une nouvelle civilisation
de pairs qui doit bouleverser les modèles établis. Je cite ci-après qq
passages remarquables de l'interview conduit par David Leloup :

"Il s’agit donc d’une grande transformation culturelle qui conduit à un
paradigme participatif.

Le P2P est d’abord un concept descriptif. Il permet d’analyser des
nouvelles formes d’organisation. Là où le concept de peer-to-peer
devient encore plus puissant, c’est quand il passe du statut d’outil
descriptif à une utilisation normative. Comment le monde changerait-il,
comment ma vie et mon éthique changent-elles, quand je commence à exiger
des relations de pairs dans la totalité de mes actes ? Le peer-to-peer
acquiert alors une véritable puissance révolutionnaire. C’est par
exemple ce que le mouvement féministe a voulu et en partie réalisé : un
refus d’accepter encore plus longtemps l’inégalité avec les hommes. Il y
a aujourd’hui un véritable exode vers les interstices du système : non
seulement il y a les «downshifters» comme moi-même, mais également des
pans entiers de la jeunesse qui refusent la féodalité intrinsèque de la
structure des entreprises.

Le peer-to-peer est en effet la structure même du troisième
capitalisme : le capitalisme cognitif, qui remplace le capitalisme
industriel lui-même ayant remplacé le capitalisme marchand.

...liée à la notion de «noosphère» de Teilhard de Chardin, c’est-à-dire
la sphère spécifiquement culturelle, humaine. Le peer-to-peer permet une
interconnexion de tous les cerveaux au niveau planétaire, et permet donc
une action globale afin de répondre aux énormes défis écologiques et
autres. Avant l’avènement d’Internet, ce genre de coordination globale
était exclusivement réservée aux grandes multinationales.

le P2P permet de créer un contre-pouvoir qui combine l’échange
égalitaire et la création d’une nouvelle sphère cognitive commune – ce
que Lawrence Lessig appelle les «Creative Commons».

    - Marc Dangeard in http://casailor.blogspot.com/2005/04/p2p-et-societe.html

"Je viens de lire l'essai de Michel Bauwens sur le Peer-to-Peer, et
c’est extremement interessant. Ca se lit vite, et ca en vaut l'effort:
[http://noosphere.cc/P2P2bi.htm][] La conclusion est qu’il y a dans
l’avenement du peer to peer une vraie opportunite de changer le systeme
dans lequel nous vivons.

En relation avec cette analyse sur l’evolution des modes de
communication vers un modele peer to peer, et sur les modeles de societe
qui peuvent en decouler, je suis convaincu que la facon dont on peut
ameliorer les choses en matiere de business, d’enrichissement spirituel
de l’individu au sein d’une entreprise, et de repartission des richesses
en general est de passer par la creation d'entreprises qui seront
construites sur des modeles nouveaux, ou les employes pourront
participer activement et volontairement aux process et ou la
distribution du revenu se fera de facon plus large, un peu sur le modele
des stocks options qui sont distribuees aujourd'hui dans les start-ups
de la Silicon Valley (mais avec un twist). Rien de radical, pas de
revolution, plutot une evolution des modes de fonctionnement existants
mais pour des resultats qui seront eux radicalement differents;
l'entreprise de demain dont je parle dans un post precedent."

Retrieved from
"[?title=Appendix\_4:\_Reactions\_to\_the\_Essay:\_Kudo%27s&oldid=2050][]"

-   This page was last modified on 30 November 2005, at 12:40.
-   This page has been accessed 2,205 times.
-   [Copyright Information][]

-   [\<!-- --\>][]
-   [About the P2P Foundation Wiki][]
-   \<!-- --\>

-   [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]][]
-   [![Powered by MediaWiki][]][]

  []: /Main_Page "Visit the main page"
  [Page]: /Appendix_4:_Reactions_to_the_Essay:_Kudo%27s
    "View the content page [c]"
  [Discussion]: ?title=Talk:Appendix_4:_Reactions_to_the_Essay:_Kudo%27s&action=edit&redlink=1
    "Discussion about the content page [t]"
  [1]: #
  [Share this]: http://www.addthis.com/bookmark.php?v=20
  [Read]: /Appendix_4:_Reactions_to_the_Essay:_Kudo%27s
  [View source]: ?title=Appendix_4:_Reactions_to_the_Essay:_Kudo%27s&action=edit
    "This page is protected.
    You can view its source [e]"
  [View history]: ?title=Appendix_4:_Reactions_to_the_Essay:_Kudo%27s&action=history
    "Past revisions of this page [h]"
  [Search]: /skins/vector/images/search-ltr.png?303
  [Log in]: ?title=Special:UserLogin&returnto=Appendix+4%3A+Reactions+to+the+Essay%3A+Kudo%27s
    "You are encouraged to log in; however, it is not mandatory [o]"
  [Wiki Main Page]: /Main_Page
  [Blog [EN]]: http://blog.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Blog [GR]]: http://bloggr.p2pfoundation.net/
  [Ning Network]: http://p2pfoundation.ning.com
  [Recent changes]: /Special:RecentChanges
    "A list of recent changes in the wiki [r]"
  [Random page]: /Special:Random "Load a random page [x]"
  [Help]: /Help:Contents "The place to find out"
  [Donations]: /P2P_Foundation:Site_support
  [What links here]: /Special:WhatLinksHere/Appendix_4:_Reactions_to_the_Essay:_Kudo%27s
    "A list of all wiki pages that link here [j]"
  [Related changes]: /Special:RecentChangesLinked/Appendix_4:_Reactions_to_the_Essay:_Kudo%27s
    "Recent changes in pages linked from this page [k]"
  [Special pages]: /Special:SpecialPages
    "A list of all special pages [q]"
  [Printable version]: ?title=Appendix_4:_Reactions_to_the_Essay:_Kudo%27s&printable=yes
  [Permanent link]: ?title=Appendix_4:_Reactions_to_the_Essay:_Kudo%27s&oldid=2050
    "Permanent link to this revision of the page"
  [navigation]: #mw-head
  [search]: #p-search
  [http://radio.weblogs.com/0117128/]: http://radio.weblogs.com/0117128/
  [http://p2p.weblogsinc.com/entry/1234000653037158/]: http://p2p.weblogsinc.com/entry/1234000653037158/
  [http://noosphere.cc/P2P2bi.htm]: http://noosphere.cc/P2P2bi.htm
  [?title=Appendix\_4:\_Reactions\_to\_the\_Essay:\_Kudo%27s&oldid=2050]:
    ?title=Appendix_4:_Reactions_to_the_Essay:_Kudo%27s&oldid=2050
  [Copyright Information]: http://p2pfoundation.net/P2P_Foundation:Copyright
    "P2P Foundation Notice on Copyrights"
  [\<!-- --\>]: /P2P_Foundation:Privacy_policy
    "P2P Foundation:Privacy policy"
  [About the P2P Foundation Wiki]: /P2P_Foundation:About
    "P2P Foundation:About"
  [Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported]: http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-sa/3.0/88x31.png
  [![Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported][]]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  [Powered by MediaWiki]: /skins/common/images/poweredby_mediawiki_88x31.png
  [![Powered by MediaWiki][]]: //www.mediawiki.org/
